
Transcriber's Note:

   Obvious mis-spellings and printing errors have been corrected.
   Variant spellings of the same word have been retained.

   With the exception of Note 263, which was retained to facilitate the
   numbering of footnotes, corrections indicated on the "Errata" page
   have been made.

   Notes 50 and 287, and pages iii and iv mentioned in "Errata," are
   notes 59 and 297, and pages 67 and 68 respectively herein.

   Superscripts are indicated with by the carat character ^.
   Superscripts containing more than one letter are enclosed by
   curly brackets (^{}).

   Footnotes, which are numerous, are placed immediately following
   the paragraph in which they appear.

   The word, "negors", is not believed to be a typographical error.

   A missing, censored, or omitted word on page 17 has been shown
   by ----.

   "See note p. 37" in Footnote 1 and "see note pp. 48, 49" in
   Footnote II have been changed to "See note Q" and "see note CC"
   respectively to conform to the footnote numbering in this document.





SENATE DOCUMENT.--(Extra.)

COLONIAL RECORDS OF VIRGINIA.







Baltimore
Genealogical Publishing Co.
1964

Originally Published

Richmond, Va:
R.F. Walker, Superintendent Public Printing.
1874.




CONTENTS.


     I. The First Assembly of Virginia, held July 30, 1619,               9

    II. List of the livinge and the dead in Virginia, Feb'y 16, 1623,    37

   III. A briefe declaration of the plantation of Virginia, during the
          first twelve years, when Sir Thomas Smith was Governor
          of the Company,                                                69

    IV. A list of the number of men, women and children, inhabitants
          in the several Counties within the Collony of Virginia, in
          1634,                                                          91

     V. A letter from Charles II., acknowledging the receipt of a
          present of Virginia Silk, 1668,                                97

    VI. A list of the Parishes in Virginia, 1680,                       103

   VII. Addenda,                                                        105




ERRATA.


 Page 13--Note 50.--For McDowell read McDonald.

 Page 14.--In last line of notes insert comma after Bancroft.

 Page 23.--Omit the whole of note 263.

 Page 24.--Note, 287, should read: committees, McDonald.

 Page 35.--In second line from bottom for Stith read Smith.

 Page 41 and 50.--For I, in notes, read we.

 Page 61.--In Editor's Note, for Neil read Neill.

 Page iii.--In Preface to Brief Declaration, lines fourteen and
 seventeen, for Smythe read Smith.

 Page iii.--_Ib._, line 29, for Kieth read Keith.

 Page iv.--Line twenty-one, for Forcer read Force's.

 Page 89.--Preface, line eight, omit "the" before massacre.




THE PROCEEDINGS

OF THE

FIRST ASSEMBLY OF VIRGINIA,

_Held July 30th, 1619._




INTRODUCTION.


The documents herewith presented are printed from copies obtained from
the Public Record Office of Great Britain. When the question of the
boundary line between Maryland and Virginia was before the Legislature
of the latter State, in 1860, Colonel Angus W. McDonald was sent to
England to obtain the papers necessary to protect the interests of
Virginia. He brought back "nine volumes of manuscripts and one book
containing forty-eight maps" (see his report, Virginia Legislative
Documents, No. 39, 1861,). The volumes of manuscripts contained, upon an
average, 425 pages each, and were filled with valuable historical
documents, of many of which no copies had ever been seen on this
continent since the originals were sent from the Colony of Virginia. In
a conversation with the writer, held soon after his return from England,
in March, 1861, Colonel McDonald stated that having obtained copies of
all the documents relating to the question of the boundary line which
could be found, and having more money left of the appropriation made
than was needed to pay the expenses of his return home, he decided to
devote the surplus to obtaining copies of papers relating to the early
history of the State, without reference to the question of the boundary
line. This statement will, we presume, satisfactorily account for the
presence in his collection of such papers as do not relate to the
subject upon which he was engaged. That he was well qualified to select
such papers is evident from an examination of the list which he made
out.

During the occupation of the State capital building by the Federal
troops and officials, after the surrender of the Confederate authorities
in April, 1865, a very large quantity of the official documents filed in
the archives of the State were removed from that building, and at the
same time four of the nine volumes and the portfolio of maps above
mentioned. Nothing has been heard from any of them since. In 1870, the
question of the boundary line being again before the Legislature of
Virginia, the Governor sent the Hon. D.C. De Jarnette upon the same
errand that Colonel McDonald had so well performed, and the result was
the obtaining of such papers as he could find relating to the subject
under consideration, including duplicates of some of those which though
useful in this connection, are included in the five volumes remaining of
those collected by Col. McDonald; also, charters of great length, but
which are to be found in print in the histories and statutes of the
State, and many of the miscellaneous papers which Colonel McDonald had
copied under the circumstances above named. Among the latter is the
account of the first meeting of the Assembly at Jamestown in 1619. When
Colonel McDonald visited the State Paper Office (as it was then called)
in 1860, this great repository of historical materials had not been
thrown open to the public, and he tells us in his report that it was
"twenty days after his arrival in London before he could obtain
permission to examine the archives of the State Paper Office." A year or
two afterwards all of the restrictions which had existed were removed,
the papers arranged chronologically, and an index made by which they
could be referred to. Farther, W. Noel Sainsbury, Esq., one of the
officers of what is now called the Public Record Office, had published a
calendar of all the papers relating to the British colonies in North
America and the West Indies, from the first discoveries to 1660 (soon be
followed by another coming down to the period of the independence of the
United States), which contains a brief abstract of every paper included
in the above named period, so that enquirers upon subjects embraced in
this calendar can by reference see what the office has on file relating
to it, and obtain copies of the documents required, at a much less cost
than a voyage to England. Acting upon this knowledge, the Library
Committee of the Virginia Legislature has made a contract with Mr.
Sainsbury for copies of the titles and copious abstracts of every paper
in the Public Record Office, and other repositories, which relates to
the history of Virginia while a Colony. All of which he proposes to
furnish for about Â£250, being less than one-half the cost of either of
the missions sent, which have obtained only a small fraction of the
papers which we are to receive. He is performing his work in a most
satisfactory manner; so much is he interested in the task that he has
greatly exceeded his agreement by furnishing gratuitously full and
complete copies of many documents of more than ordinary interest. Yet
notwithstanding the known facilities afforded by the British Government
and its officials, Mr. De Jarnette complains that he was refused
permission to examine the Rolls Office and the State Paper Office (see
his report, Senate Documents Session 1871-'2, p. 12); and further, on
page 15, he informs us that the papers which he obtained "had to be dug
from a mountain of Colonial records with care and labor." His troubles
were further increased by the fact that "the Colonial papers are not
arranged under heads of respective Colonies, but thrown promiscuously
together and constitute an immense mass of ill kept and badly written
records," ib. p. 22.

The reader will infer from the preceding remarks that the State has two
complete copies of the record of the proceedings of the first Assembly
which met at Jamestown, viz: the McDonald and the De Jarnette copies,
and also an abstract furnished by Mr. Sainsbury. Bancroft, the
historian, obtained a copy of this paper, which was printed in the
collections of the New York Historical Society for 1857. We have
therefore been enabled to compare three different versions, and in a
measure, a fourth. The De Jarnette copy being in loose sheets, written
on one side only, was selected as the most convenient for the printer,
and the text is printed from it. Where this differs from either of the
others the foot notes show the differences, and, when no reference is
made it is because all of them correspond.

When these papers were submitted as a part of the report of the
Commissioners on the Boundary Line a joint resolution was adopted by
both houses of the Legislature authorizing the Committee on the Library
to print such of the papers as might be selected, provided the consent
of the Commission could be obtained. Application was made to allow the
first and second papers in this pamphlet to be printed but it was
refused. The Commission having been dissolved the Committee on the
Library have assumed the responsibility and herewith submit this
instalment of these interesting documents, which were written before the
Colony of Maryland was known, and all of which, save the first, were
never before printed.

The Report of the proceedings of the first Assembly is prefaced with the
introductory note published with Mr. Bancroft's copy, to which a few
notes explanatory have been added.

Trusting that this instalment of these historical records of the Ancient
Dominion will be acceptable to the students of our early history, and
sufficiently impress the members of the Legislature with their value to
move them to make an appropriation sufficient to print all that has been
obtained, this is

Respectfully submitted,
by your obedient servants,

THOS. H. WYNNE,                  }
Chm. Senate Com. on Library,     }
                                 } _Sub Committee in_
W.S. GILMAN, Charge of Library.  } _Charge of Library._
Chm. House Com. on Library.      }




_INTRODUCTORY NOTE._


Virginia, for twelve years after its settlement, languished under the
government of Sir Thomas Smith, Treasurer of the Virginia Company in
England. The Colony was ruled during that period by laws written in
blood; and its history shows how the narrow selfishness of despotic
power could counteract the best efforts of benevolence. The colonists
suffered an extremity of distress too horrible to be described.
In April, 1619, Sir George Yeardley arrived. Of the emigrants who had
been sent over at great cost, not one in twenty then remained alive. "In
James Citty were only those houses that Sir Thomas Gates built in the
tyme of his government, with one wherein the Governor allwayes dwelt,
and a church, built wholly at the charge of the inhabitants of that
citye, of timber, being fifty foote in length and twenty foot in
breadth." At Henrico, now Richmond, there were no more than "three old
houses, a poor ruinated Church, with some few poore buildings in the
Islande."[1] "For ministers to instruct the people, he founde only three
authorized, two others who never received their orders." "The natives he
founde uppon doubtfull termes;" so that when the twelve years of Sir
Thomas Smith's government expired, Virginia, according to the
"judgements" of those who were then members of the Colony, was "in a
poore estate."[A]

From the moment of Yeardley's arrival dates the real life of Virginia.
He brought with him "Commissions and instructions from the Company for
the better establishinge of a Commonwealth heere."[B] He made
proclamation, "that those cruell lawes by which we" (I use the words of
the Ancient Planters themselves) "had soe longe been governed, were now
abrogated, and that we were to be governed by those free lawes which his
Majesties subjectes live under in Englande." Nor were these
considerations made dependent on the good will of administrative
officers.

"And that they might have a hande in the governinge of themselves," such
are the words of the Planters, "yt was graunted that a generall
Assemblie shoulde be helde yearly once, whereat were to be present the
Gov^r and Counsell w^{th} two Burgesses from each Plantation, freely to
be elected by the Inhabitants thereof, this Assemblie to have power to
make and ordaine whatsoever lawes and orders should by them be thought
good and proffitable for our subsistance."[C]

In conformity with these instructions, Sir George Yeardley "sente his
summons all over the country, as well to invite those of the Counsell of
Estate that were absente, as also for the election of Burgesses;"[D] and
on Friday, the 30th day of July, 1619, the first elective legislative
body of this continent assembled at James City.

In the relation of Master John Rolfe, inserted by Captain John Smith in
his History of Virginia,[E] there is this meagre notice of the Assembly:
"The 25 of June came in the _Triall_ with Corne and Cattell in all
safety, which tooke from vs cleerely all feare of famine; then our
gouernor and councell caused Burgesses to be chosen in all places and
met at a generall Assembly, where all matters were debated thought
expedient for the good of the Colony."
This account did not attract the attention of Beverley, the early
historian of Virginia, who denies that there was any Assembly held there
before May, 1620.[F]

The careful Stith, whose work is not to be corrected without a hearty
recognition of his superior diligence and exemplary fidelity, gives an
account[G] of this first legislative body, though he errs a little in
the date by an inference from Rolfe's narrative, which the words do not
warrant.

The prosperity of Virginia begins with the day when it received, as "a
commonwealth," the freedom to make laws for itself. In a solemn address
to King James, which was made during the government of Sir Francis
Wyatt, and bears the signature of the Governor, Council, and apparently
every member of the Assembly, a contrast is drawn between the former
"miserable bondage," and "this just and gentle authoritye which hath
cherished us of late by more worthy magistrates. And we, our wives and
poor children shall ever pray to God, as our bounden duty is, to give
you in this worlde all increase of happines, and to crowne you in the
worlde to come w^{th} immortall glorye."[H]

A desire has long existed to recover the record of the proceedings of
the Assembly which inaugurated so happy a revolution. Stith was unable
to find it; no traces of it were met by Jefferson; and Hening,[I] and
those who followed Hening, believed it no longer extant. Indeed, it was
given up as hopelessly lost.

Having, during a long period of years, instituted a very thorough
research among the papers relating to America in the British State Paper
Office, partly in person and partly with the assistance of able and
intelligent men employed in that Department, I have at last been so
fortunate as to obtain the "Proceedings of the First Assembly of
Virginia."[5] the document is in the form of "a reporte" from the
Speaker; and is more fall and circumstantial than any subsequent
journal of early legislation in the Ancient Dominion.

Many things are noticeable. The Governor and Council sat with the
Burgesses; and took part in motions and debates. The Secretary of the
Colony was chosen Speaker, and I am not sure that he was a Burgess.[6]
This first American Assembly set the precedent of beginning legislation
with prayer. It is evident that Virginia was then as thoroughly a Church
of England colony, as Connecticut afterwards was a Calvinistic one. The
inauguration of legislative power in the Ancient Dominion preceded the
existence of negro slavery, which we will believe it is destined also to
survive. The earliest Assembly in the oldest of the original thirteen
States, at its first session, took measures "towards the erecting of" a
"University and Colledge." Care was also taken for the education of
Indian children. Extravagance in dress was not prohibited, but the
ministers were to profit by a tax on excess in apparel. On the whole,
the record of these Proceedings will justify the opinion of Sir Edward
Sandys, that "they were very well and judiciously carried." The
different functions of government may have been confounded and the laws
were not framed according to any speculative theory; but a perpetual
interest attaches to the first elective body representing the people of
Virginia, more than a year before the Mayflower, with the Pilgrims, left
the harbor of Southampton, and while Virginia was still the oldest
British Colony on the whole Continent of America.

GEORGE BANCROFT.

NEW YORK, _October 3, 1856_.

[A] "A Briefe Declaration of the Plantation of Virginia during the first
twelve yeares, when Sir Thomas Smyth was Governor, of the Companie, and
downe to this present tyme. By the Ancient Planters now remaining alive
in Virginia."--_MS. in my possession._[2]

[B] "A Briefe Declaration," &c.

[C] "A Briefe Declaration," &c.

[D] "Proceedings of the first Assembly," now first printed in this
volume.

[1] "Henrico, now Richmond," is a grievous error. "Henrico, or Henricus,
was situated ten miles below the present site of Richmond, on the main
land, to which the peninsula known as Farrar's Island was joined." See
footnote Q.--ED.

[2] This document is the third in this collection. It is printed from
the copy obtained by Col. McDonald.--ED.

[E] Smith's Generall Historie of Virginia, Richmond edition, Vol. ii.
pp. 38, 39.

[F] See Beverley's History of Virginia, p. 37 of the first edition, and
p. 35 of the second.[3]

[G] Stith's History of Virginia p. 160, Williamsburg edition.[4]

[H] MS. Copy of Address of Sir Francis Wyatt, &c., &c., to King James
I., signed by Sir Francis Wyatt and 32 others.
[I] Hening's Statutes at Large, I., p. 119. refers to the acts of
1623-'4 as "the earliest now extant."

[3] "These Burgesses met the Governor and Council at Jamestown in 1620,
and sat in consultation in the same house with them as the method of the
Scots Parliament is." "This was the first Generall Assembly that ever
was held there."--Beverley.--ED.

[4] "And about the latter end of June (1619) he (Sir George Yeardley,
Governor,) called the first General Assembly that was ever held in
Virginia. Counties were not yet laid of, but they elected their
representatives by townships. So that the Burroughs of Jamestown,
Henrico, Bermuda Hundred, and the rest, each sent their members to the
Assembly." * * * * "and hence it is that our lower house of Assembly was
first called the House of Burgesses," Stith, p. 160. "In May, this year
(1620), there was held another Generall Assembly, which has, through
mistake, and the indolence and negligence of our historians in searching
such ancient records as are still extant in the country, been commonly
reported the first General Assembly," Ib. p. 182. We do not see that
Stith "errs" even "a little in the data." Rolfe says, "The 25 of June
came in the _Triall_ with Corne and Cattell in all safety, which took
from us cleerely all feare of famine, then our gouernor and councell
caused Burgesses to be chosen in all places, and met at a general
Assembly," Smith, p. 128. Stith says, "And about the latter end of June
he called," &c., Stith, p. 160. Neither intimate _when_ the Assembly
_met_, only that the governor called them to the latter part of
June.--ED.

[5] The first published notice of the existence of this paper occurred
in the proceedings of the annual meeting of the Virginia Historical
society, held December 15, 1853. In the report of the Executive
Committee the chairman, Conway Robinson, Esq., states that he had seen
the original report in the State Paper Office in London, on a recent
visit to that city.--See Virginia Historical Reporter, Vol. I., 1854.
Whatever question there may be in regard to priority of discovery, it is
to be regretted that it was left to the Historical Society of another
State to publish a document of so much value to the one to which it
solely relates.--ED.

[6] The Secretary of the Colony and Speaker of the first Assembly was
John Pory. If he had been one of the Burgesses his name would have
appeared with the others. Through the influence of the Earl at Warwick
he was made Secretary to the Virginia Company. Campbell says, "He was
educated at Cambridge, where he took the Master of Arts in April, 1610.
It is supposed he was a member of the House of Commons. He was much of a
traveller, and was at Venice in 1613, at Amsterdam in 1617, and shortly
after at Paris." "Sir George Yeardley appointed him one of his
Council."--Campbell, p. 139. The record shows that he acted as the
presiding officer of the first Assembly, whether _ex officio_ or by
selection is not stated. It will be seen that a typographical error in
Bancroft's pamphlet makes his name Povy. In Smith's General Historie
there is a paper styled "The observations of Master John Pory,
Secretarie of Virginia, in his travels;" it gives an account of his
voyage to the eastern shore.--Smith, p. 141. Neill says of him, "John
Pory was a graduate of Cambridge, a great traveller and good writer, but
gained the reputation of being a chronic tipler and literary vagabond
and sponger." When young he excited the interest of Hakluyt, who, in a
dedication to the third volume of his, remarks: "Now, because long since
I did foresee that my profession of Divinitie, the care of my family;
and other occasions, might call or divert me from these kind of
endeavour, I, therefore have, for these three years last past,
encouraged and gathered in these studies of Cosmographia and former
histories my honest, industrious and learned friend, Mr. John Porey, one
of speciall skill and extraordinary hope, to perform great matters in
the same, and beneficial to the Commonwealth." "Pory, in 1600, prepared
a _Geographical History of Africa_, but he soon disappointed the
expectations of his friends."

A letter from London, dated July 26, 1623, says: "Our old acquaintance,
Mr. Porey, is in poore case, and in prison at the Terceras, whither he
was driven by contrary winds, from the north coast of Virginia, where he
had been upon some discovery, and upon his arrival he was arraigned and
in danger of being hanged for a pirate." "He died about 1635." For
further particulars from contemporary authorities, see Neill's History
of the Virginia Company of London. Albany, Munsell, 1869.--ED.




COLONIAL RECORDS OF VIRGINIA.




STATE PAPERS.

COLONIAL. VOL. I.--NO. 45.

[July 30, 1619.][J]


     _A Reporte of the manner of proceeding[K] in the General
     assembly convented at James citty in Virginia, July 30, 1619,
     consisting of the Governo^r, the Counsell of Estate[L] and two
     Burgesses elected out of eache Incorporation and Plantation,
     and being dissolved the 4^{th} of August next ensuing._

First. Sir George Yeardley, Knight Governo^r & Captaine general of
Virginia, having sente his sumons all over the Country, as well to
invite those of the Counsell of Estate that were absente as also for the
election of Burgesses, there were chosen and appeared

_For James citty_
      Captaine William Powell,
      Ensigne William Spense.

_For Charles citty_
      Samuel Sharpe,
      Samuel Jordan.

_For the citty of Henricus_
      Thomas Dowse,
      John Polentine.

[J] The caption is after the De Jarnette copy. Bancroft has "S.P.O."
(State Paper Office.) "Am'a & W. Ind. Virg.: Indorsed, Mr. Povy out of
Virginia. The Proceedings of the First Assembly of Virginia: July 1619."
Sainsbury's Calendar of State papers: Colonial, 1574-1660, has,
"_Endorsed by Mr. Carleton_. Mr. Pory out of Virginia."--p. 22.

[K] Proceedings. Bancroft.

[L] State. McDonald.

_For Kiccowtan_
      Captaine William Tucker,
      William Capp.

_For Martin Brandon--Capt. John Martin's Pla'tation_
      M^r Thomas Davis,
      M^r Robert Stacy.

_For Smythe's hundred_
      Captain Thomas Graves,
      M^r Walter Shelley.

_For Martin's hundred_
      M^r John Boys,[7]
      John Jackson.

_For Argall's guiffe_[8]
      M^r Pawlett,
      M^r Gourgaing.[9]

_For Flowerdieu hundred_
      Ensigne[10] Rossingham,
      M^r Jefferson.

_For Captain Lawne's plantation_
      Captain Christopher Lawne,
      Ensigne[11] Washer.

_For Captaine Warde's plantation_
      Captaine Warde,
      Lieutenant Gibbes.

The most convenient place we could finde to sitt in was the Quire of the
Churche Where Sir George Yeardley, the Governour, being sett downe in
his accustomed place, those of the Counsel of Estate sate nexte him on
both handes, excepte onely the Secretary then appointed Speaker, who
sate right before him, John Twine, clerke[12] of the General assembly,
being placed nexte the Speaker, and Thomas Pierse, the Sergeant,
standing at the barre, to be ready for any service the Assembly shoulde
comaund[13] him. But forasmuche as men's affaires doe little prosper
where God's service is neglected, all the Burgesses tooke their places
in the Quire till a prayer was said by Mr. Bucke, the Minister, that it
would please God to guide and sanctifie all our proceedings[14] to his
owne glory and the good of this Plantation. Prayer being ended, to the
intente that as we[15] had begun at God Almighty, so we[16] might
proceed w^{th} awful and due respecte towards the Lieutenant, our most
gratious and dread Soveraigne, all the Burgesses were intreatted to
retyre themselves into the body of the Churche, w^{ch} being done,
before they were fully admitted, they were called in order and by name,
and so every man (none staggering at it) tooke the oathe of Supremacy,
and then entred[17] the Assembly. At Captaine Warde the Speaker tooke
exception, as at one that without any Comission or authority had seatted
himselfe either upon the Companies, and then his Plantation would not be
lawfull, or on Captain Martin's lande, and so[18] he was but a limbe or
member of him, and there could be but two Burgesses for all. So Captaine
Warde was comanded to absente himselfe till such time as the Assembly
had agreed what was fitt for him to doe. After muche debate, they
resolved on this order following:

[7] Boyes, McDonald.
[8] Guiste, Bancroft.

[9] Gourgainy, McDonald and Bancroft.

[10] Ensign, Bancroft.

[11] Ensign, Bancroft.

[12] Clerk, McDonald.

[13] Comand, McDonald.

[14] Proceedinges, Bancroft.

[15] wee, McDonald.

[16] wee, McDonald.

[17] entered, McDonald.

[18] soe, McDonald.

     An order concluded by the General assembly concerning Captaine
     Warde, July 30^{th},[19] 1619, at the opening of the said
     Assembly.

At the reading of the names of the Burgesses, Exception was taken
against Captaine Warde as having planted here in Virginia without any
authority or comission from the Tresurer, Counsell and Company in
Englande. But considering he had bene at so great chardge and paines to
augmente this Colony, and had adventured his owne person in the action,
and since that time had brought home a good[20] quantity of fishe, to
relieve the Colony by waye of trade, and above all, because the
Comission for authorising the General Assembly admitteth of two
Burgesses out of every plantation w^{th}out restrainte or exception.
Upon all these considerations, the Assembly was contented to admitt of
him and his Lieutenant (as members of their body and Burgesses) into
their society. Provided, that the said Captaine Warde, w^{th} all
expedition, that is to saye between this and the nexte general assembly
(all lawful impediments excepted), should procure from the Tresurer,[21]
Counsell and Company in England a comission lawfully to establish[22]
and plant himselfe and his Company as the Chieffs[23] of other
Plantations have done. And in case he doe neglect this he is to stande
to the censure of the nexte generall assembly. To this Captaine Warde,
in the presence of us all, having given his consente and undertaken to
performe the same, was, together w^{th} his Lieutenant, by voices of the
whole Assembly first admitted to take the oath of Supremacy, and then to
make up their number and to sitt amongst them.

[19] 30, Bancroft.

[20] goode, McDonald.

[21] Treasurer, McDonald.

[22] establishe, McDonald, Bancroft.

[23] Chiefes, McDonald.

This being done, the Governour himselfe alledged that before we
proceeded any further it behooved us to examine whither it were fitt,
that Captaine Martin's Burgesses shoulde[24] have any place in the
Assembly, forasmuche as he hath a clause in his Patente w^{ch} doth not
onely exempte him from that equality and uniformity of lawes and orders
w^{er}[25] the great charter faith are to extende[26] over the whole
Colony, but also from diverse such lawes as we must be enforced[27] to
make in the General Assembly. That clause is as followeth: Item. That it
shall and may be lawfull to and for the said Captain John Martin, his
heyers, executours and assignes to governe and comaunde all suche[28]
person or persons as at this time he shall carry over with him, or that
shalbe[29] sente him hereafter, free from any comaunde of the Colony,
excepte it be in ayding and assisting the same against[30] any forren or
domestical enemy.

[24] should, Bancroft.

[25] W^{ch}, McDonald and Bancroft.

[26] extend, Bancroft.

[27] inforced, McDonald.

[28] such, McDonald.

[29] shall be, McDonald.

[30] ag^{st}, McDonald.

Upon the[31] motion of the Governour, discussed the same time in the
assembly, ensued this order following:

     An order of the General Assembly touching a clause in
     Captain[32] Martin's Patent at James Citty, July 30, 1619.

After all the Burgesses had taken the oath of Supremacy and were
admitted into the house, and all sett downe in their places, a Copie of
Captain[33] Martin's Patent[34] was produced by the Govern^{or}[35] out
of a Clause whereof it appeared that when the general[36] assembly had
made some kinde of lawes requisite for the whole Colony, he and his
Burgesses and people might deride the whole company and chuse whether
they would obay[37] the same or no.[M] It was therefore ordered in
Courte that the foresaid two Burgesses should w^{th}drawe themselves out
of the assembly till suche time as Captaine Martin had made his
personall appearance before them. At what time, if upon their motion, if
he would be contente to quitte and give over that parte of his Patente,
and contrary therunto woulde submitte himselfe to the general forme of
governemente as all others did, that then his Burgesses should be
readmitted, otherwise they were utterly to be excluded as being spies
rather than[43] loyal Burgesses, because they had offered themselves to
be assistant at the making of[44] lawes w^{ch} both themselves and those
whom they represented might chuse whether they would obaye[45] or not.

[M] The following passage is a side note on the margin of the McDonald
and De Jarnette copies, but Bancroft includes it in the text:--The
authority of Captaine[38] Martin's Patent graunted by the Counsell &
Company under their Comon[39] Seale, being of an higher condition[40]
and of greatter[41] force then any Acte of the General[42] Assembly.

[31] this, McDonald and Bancroft.

[32] Captaine, McDonald.

[33] Captaine, McDonald.

[34] Patente, McDonald and Bancroft.

[35] Governour, McDonald and Bancroft.

[36] Generall, McDonald and Bancroft.

[37] obey, McDonald; obaye, Bancroft.

[38] Capt., McDonald.

[39] Common, McDonald.

[40] comission, McDonald.

[41] greater, McDonald.

[42] Generall.

[43] then, McDonald.

[44] of the, McD.

[45] obeye, McDonald; obaye, Bancroft.

Then came there in a complainte against Captain[46] Martin, that having
sente his Shallop to trade for corne into the baye, under the commaunde
of one Ensigne Harrison, the saide Ensigne should affirme to one Thomas
Davis, of Paspaheighe,[47] Gent. (as the said Thomas Davis deposed upon
oathe,) that they had made a harde voiage, had they not mett w^{th} a
Canoa coming out of a creeke where their shallop could not goe. For the
Indians refusing to sell their Corne, those of the shallop entered the
Canoa w^{th} their armes and tooke it by force, measuring out the corne
w^{th} a baskett they had into the Shallop and (as the said Ensigne
Harrison saith) giving them satisfaction in copper beades[48] and other
trucking stuffe.

Hitherto Mr. Davys upon his oath.

[46] Captaine, McDonald and Bancroft.

[47] Paspaheighs, McDonald, Banc'ft.

[48] beads, McDonald.

Furthermore it was signified from Opochancano to the Governour that
those people had complained to him to procure them justice.[49] For
w^{ch} considerations and because suche[50] outrages as this might
breede danger and loss[51] of life to others of the Colony w^{ch} should
have leave to trade in the baye hereafter, and for prevention of the
like violences against the Indians in time to come, this order following
was agreed on by the general assembly:

     A second order against Captain Martin, at James citty, July 30,
     1619.

It was also ordered by the Assembly the same daye that in case Captaine
Martin and the ging of his shallop would[52] not throughly answere an
accusation of an outrage comitted against a certaine Canoa of Indians in
the baye, that then it was thought reason (his Patent,[53]
notw^{th}standing the authority whereof, he had in that case abused) he
shoulde[54] from henceforth take leave of the Governour[55] as other
men, and should putt[56] in security, that his people shall comitte no
such[57] outrage any more.

[49] iustice, McDonald.

[50] such, McDonald.

[51] losse, McDonald.

[52] could, McDonald, Bancroft.

[53] Patente, McDonald and Bancroft.

[54] should, Bancroft.

[55] Governor, McDonald.

[56] put, McDonald.

[57] suche, McDonald and Bancroft.

Upon this a letter or warrant was drawen in the name of the whole
assembly to sumon Captaine Martin to appeare before them in forme
following:

     By the Governo^r[58] and general assembly of Virginia.

     Captaine Martine, we are to request[59] you upon sight hereof,
     with all convenient speed to repaire hither to James citty to
     treatt and conferre w^{th} us about some matters of
     especial[60] importance, w^{ch} concerns[61] both us and the
     whole Colony and yourself. And of this we praye you not to
     faile.

     James citty, July 30, 1619.

     To our very loving friend, Captain John Martin, Esquire, Master
     of the ordinance.

[58] Governour, Bancroft.

[59] request, McDonald.

[60] especiall, McDonald.

[61] concerne, McDonald and Bancroft.

These obstacles removed, the Speaker, who a long time had bene extreame
sickly, and therefore not able to passe through long harangues,
delivered in briefe to the whole assembly the occasions of their
meeting. Which[62] done, he read unto them the comission for
establishing the Counsell of Estate and the general[63] Assembly,
wherein their duties were described to the life.

Having thus prepared them, he read over unto them the greate Charter, or
comission of priviledges, orders and lawes, sent by Sir George Yeardley
out of Englande.[64] Which[65] for the more ease of the Committies,
having divided into fower books, he read the former two the same
forenoon for expeditious[66] sake, a second time over, and so they were
referred to the perusall of twoe Comitties, w^{ch} did reciprocally
consider of either, and accordingly brought in their opinions. But some
man may here objecte to what ende we should presume to referre that to
the examination of Comitties w^{ch} the Counsell and Company in
England[67] had already resolved to be perfect, and did expecte
nothing[68] but our assente thereunto?[69] To this we answere, that we
did it not to the ende to correcte or controll anything therein
contained, but onely in case we should finde ought not perfectly
squaring w^{th} the state of this Colony or any lawe w^{ch} did presse
or binde too harde, that we might by waye of humble petition, seeke to
have it redressed, especially because this great Charter is to binde us
and our heyers for ever.

[62] W^{ch}, McDonald.

[63] Gen^{ll}, McDonald.

[64] The substance of these will be found in the paper, "A briefe
Declaration," &c. See post.--.

[65] W^{ch}, McDonald.

[66] expeditions, Bancroft.

[67] Englande, McDonald.

[68] nothinge, McDonald.

[69] thereunto, McDonald and Bancroft.

     The names of the Comitties for perusing the first booke of the
     fower:
  1. Captain William Powell,
  2. Ensigne Rosingham,
  3. Captaine Warde,
  4. Captaine Tucker,
  5. Mr. Shelley,
  6. Thomas Douse,
  7. Samuel Jordan,
  8. Mr. Boys.

     The names of the Comitties for perusing the second booke:

  1. Captaine Dawne,[N]
  2. Captaine Graves,
  3. Ensigne Spense,
  4. Samuel Sharpe,
  5. William Cap,
  6. Mr. Pawlett,
  7. Mr. Jefferson,
  8. Mr. Jackson.


These Comitties thus appointed, we brake up the first forenoon's
assembly.

[N] Lawne, McDonald, and Bancroft, the list of Burgesses on p. 10,
showing this to be proper.

       *       *       *       *       *

After dinner the Governo^r and those that were not of the Comitties[70]
sate a seconde time, while the said Comitties[71] were employed in the
perusall of those twoe bookes. And whereas the Speaker had propounded
fower severall objects for the Assembly to confider on: namely, first,
the great charter of orders, lawes and priviledges; Secondly, which of
the instructions given by the Counsel in England to my lo: la:
warre,[72] Captain Argall or Sir George Yeardley, might conveniently
putt on the habite of lawes; Thirdly, what lawes might issue out of the
private conceipte of any of the Burgesses, or any other of the Colony;
and lastly, what petitions were[73] fitt to be sente home for England.
It pleased the Governou^r[74] for expedition[75] sake to have the second
objecte[76] of the fower to be examined & prepared by himselfe and the
Non-Comitties. Wherin after having spente some three howers'[77]
conference, the twoe Committies[78] brought in their opinions concerning
the twoe former bookes, (the second of which beginneth at these wordes
of the Charter: And forasmuche as our intente is to establish one equall
and uniforme kinde of government over all Virginia &c.,)[79] w^{ch} the
whole Assembly, because it was late, deferred to treatt[80] of till the
next morning.

[70] Comittees, McDonald.

[71] Comittees, McDonald.

[72] Lord le Warre, McDonald.

[73] we, McDonald.

[74] Governor, McDonald.

[75] expeditions, McDonald, also Bancroft.

[76] obiecte, McDonald.

[77] houres, McDonald.

[78] two Comittees, McDonald.

[79] The McDonald copy includes in () all of this from "the second of
which" to "Charter," and another single ) after &c. The De Jarnette copy
has one) only after &c. Bancroft includes what is adopted in this text.

[80] McDonald has breath.

SATTURDAY, July 31.

The nexte daye, therefore, out of the opinions of the said
Comitties,[81] it was agreed, these[82] Petitions ensuing should be
framed, to be presented to the Treasurer, Counsel & Company in England.
Upon the Comitties'[83] perusall of the first booke,[84] the General[85]
Assembly doe become most humble suitours to their lo^{ps} and to the
rest of that hon^{ble} Counsell and renowned Company, that albeit they
have bene pleased[86] to allotte unto the Governo^r[87] to themselves,
together w^{th} the Counsell of Estate here, and[88] to the officers of
Incorporations, certain lande[89] portions of lande to be layde out
w^{th}in the limites of the same, yet that[90] they woulde vouchsafe
also,[91] that[92] groundes as heretofore had bene granted by patent to
the antient[93] Planters by former Governours that had from the Company
received comission[94] so to doe, might not nowe after so muche labour
and coste, and so many yeares habitation be taken from them. And to the
ende that no man might doe or suffer any wrong in this kinde, that they
woulde favour us so muche (if they meane to graunte this our petition)
as to sende us notice, what comission or authority for graunting of
landes they have given to eache[95] particular Governour in times paste.

[81] Comittees, McDonald.

[82] those, McDonald.

[83] Comittees, McDonald.

[84] book, McDonald.

[85] Generall, McDonald.

[86] pleas'd, McDonald.

[87] Govern^r, McDonald; Gov^r, Bancroft.

[88] &, McDonald.

[89] large, McDonald.

[90] Bancroft omits "that."

[91] alsoe, Bancroft.

[92] McDonald has such and Bancroft suche after that.

[93] ancient, McDonald.

[94] Comiss^n, Bancroft.

[95] each, Bancroft.

The second petition of the General assembly framed by the Comitties[96]
out of the second book is. That the Treasurer[97] & Company in England
would be pleased w^{th} as muche convenient speed[98] as may be to sende
men hither to occupie their landes belonging to the fower
Incorporations, as well for their owne[99] behoofe and proffitt as for
the maintenance of the Counsel[100] of Estate, who are nowe[101] to
their extream hindrance often drawen far from their private busines and
likewise that they will have a care to sende[102] tenants to the
ministers of the fower Incorporations to manure their gleab, to the
intente that the allowance they have allotted them of 200 G.[103] a
yeare may the more easily be raised.

[96] Comittess, McDonald.

[97] Tresurer, McDonald.

[98] speede, McDonald.

[99] own, Bancroft.

[100] Counsell, McDonald and Bancroft.

[101] now, McDonald.

[102] send, McDonald.

[103] Â£200, Bancroft.

The thirde Petition humbly presented by this General Assembly to the
Treasurer, Counsell & Company is, that it may plainely be expressed in
the great Comission (as indeed it is not) that the antient Planters of
both sortes, viz., suche as before Sir Thomas Dales' depart[104] were
come hither upon their owne chardges,[105] and suche also as were
brought hither upon the Companie's coste, maye have their second, third
and more divisions successively in as lardge and free manner as any
other Planters. Also that they wilbe pleased to allowe to the male
children, of them and of all others begotten in Virginia, being the
onely hope of a posterity, a single share a piece, and shares for their
issues or[106] for themselves, because that in a newe plantation it is
not knowen whether man or woman be the more necessary.

[104] In the McDonaldcopy this was just written departure, then "ure"
crossed out with a pen, and the word made department. Bancroft has
departure.

[105] Charges, McDonald.

[106] McDonald and Bancroft both have "wives as," instead of "issues
or," the former being evidently the proper words.

Their fourth Petition is to beseech the Treasurer, Counsell & Company
that they would be pleased to appoint a Sub-Tresurer[107] here to
collecte their rents,[108] to the ende that[109] the Inhabitants of this
Colony be not tyed to an impossibility of paying the same yearly to the
Treasurer in England, and that they would enjoine the said Sub-Treasurer
not precisely according to the letter of the Charter to exacte mony of
us (whereof we have none at all, as we have no minte), but the true
value of the rente in comodity.

[107] Treasurer, McDonald.
[108] rentes, McDonald, Bancroft.

[109] McDonald and Bancroft both omit that.

The fifte Petition is to beseeche the Treasurer, Counsell & Company
that, towards the erecting of the University and Colledge, they will
sende, when they shall thinke[110] it most convenient, workmen of all
sortes, fitt for that purpose.

[110] McDonald and Bancroft omit it.

The sixte and laste is, they wilbe[111] pleased to change the savage
name of Kiccowtan, and to give that Incorporation a newe name.

[111] will be, McDonald.

These are the general Petitions drawen by the Comitties out of the two
former bookes w^{ch} the whole general assembly in maner and forme
above[112] sett downe doe most humbly offer up and present[113] to the
honourable construction of the Treasurer, Counsell and Company in
England.

[112] sette, Bancroft.

[113] presente, McDonald and Bancroft.

These petitions thus concluded on, those twoe Comitties broughte me[114]
a reporte what they had observed in the two latter bookes, w^{ch} was
nothing else but that the perfection of them was suche as that[115] they
could finde nothing therein subject to exception, only the
Governo^{rs}[116] particular opinion to my selfe in private hathe bene
as touching a clause in the thirde booke, that in these doubtfull times
between us and the Indians, it would beehoove[117] us not to make
as[118] lardge distances between Plantation and Plantation as ten miles,
but for our more strength ande security to drawe nearer together.

[114] In, McDonald, Bancroft.

[115] McDonald and Bancroft omit that.

[116] Govn^{rs}, McDonald; Gov^{rs}, Bancroft.

[117] Behoove, McDonald, Bancroft.

[118] So, McDonald, Bancroft.

At the same time, there remaining no[119] farther scruple in the mindes
of the Assembly touching the said great Charter of lawes, orders and
priviledges, the Speaker putt the same to the question, and so it had
both the general assent and the applause of the whole assembly, who, as
they professed themselves in the first place most submissively thankfull
to almighty god, therefore so they commaunded the Speaker to returne (as
nowe he doth) their due and humble thankes to the Treasurer, Counsell
and company for so many priviledges and favours as well in their owne
names as in the names of the whole Colony whom they represented.

[119] Noe, McDonald.

This being dispatched we fell once more[120] debating of suche
instructions given by the Counsell in England to several[121]
Governo^{rs}[122] as might be converted into lawes, the last whereof was
the Establishment of the price of Tobacco, namely, of the best at
3d[123] and the second at 18d the pounde. At the reading of this the
Assembly thought good to send for Mr. Abraham Persey, the Cape marchant,
to publishe this instruction to him, and to demaunde[124] of him if he
knewe of any impediment why it might not be admitted of? His
answere[125] was that he had not as yet received any suche order from
the Adventurers of the[126] ---- in England. And notw^{th}standing he
sawe the authority was good, yet was he unwilling to yield, till suche
time as the Governo^r[127] and Assembly had layd their commandment upon
him, out of the authority of the foresaid Instructions as followeth:

By the General Assembly.

We will and require you, Mr. Abraham Persey, Cape Marchant, from this
daye forwarde to take notice, that, according to an article in the
Instructions confirmed by the Treasurer, Counsell[128] and Company in
Englande at a general quarter courte, both by[129] voices and under
their hands[130] and the Comon seall,[131] and given to Sir George
Yeardley, knight, this present governour, Decemb.[132] 3, 1618, that
you are bounde to accepte of the Tobacco of the Colony, either for
commodities or upon billes,[133] at three shillings the beste[134] and
the second sorte at 18d the pounde, and this shalbe[135] your sufficient
dischardge.

James citty out of the said General Assembly, July 31,[136] 1619.

[120] McDonald and Bancroft insert to.

[121] Severall, McDonald.

[122] Govern^{rs}, McDonald; Gov., Bancroft.
[123] The text, which follows the De Jarnette copy, is evidently wrong.
The McDonald copy is blotted and illegible. Bancroft has 3.s. and
Sainsbury's abstract the same.

[124] Demand, McDonald.

[125] Answer, McDonald, Bancroft.

[126] McDonald and Bancroft both fill the space with Magazin.

[127] Gov^r, McDonald, Bancroft.

[128] Counsell, Treasurer, McDonald.

[129] McD. inserts the.

[130] handes, McD.

[131] seale, McD., Bft.

[132] Dec^r, McDonald.

[133] bills, McDonald.

[134] best, McDonald.

[135] shall be, McDonald.

[136] 31st, Bancroft.

At the same[137] the Instructions convertible into lawes were referred
to the consideration of the above named Committies,[138] viz., the
general Instructions to the first Committie[139] and the particular
Instructions to the second, to be returned by them into the assembly on
Munday morning.

[137] McDonald and Bancroft insert time.

[138] Committees, McDonald.

[139] Committee, McDonald.

SUNDAY, Aug. 1.

Mr. Shelley, one of the Burgesses, deceased.

MUNDAY,[140] Aug. 2.

Captain John Martin (according to the sumons sent him on Fryday,[141]
July 30,) made his personall appearance at the barre, whenas the Speaker
having first read unto him the orders of the Assembly that concerned
him, he pleaded lardgely for himself[142] to them both and
indevoured[143] to answere some other thinges[144] that were objected
against[145] his Patente. In fine, being demanded out of the former
order whether he would quitte that clause of his Patent[146] w^{ch}
(quite otherwise then Sir William Throckmorton's, Captain Christopher
Dawnes'[147] and other men's patentes) exempteth himselffe and his
people from all services of the Colonie excepte onely in case of warre
against[148] a forren or domesticall enemie. His answere[149] was
negative, that he would not infringe any parte[150] of his Patente.
Whereupon it was resolved by the Assembly that his Burgesses should have
no admittance.

[140] Monday, McDonald and Bancroft.

[141] Friday, McDonald.

[142] himselfe, McDonald and Bancroft.

[143] & indeavoured, McDonald.

[144] things, McDonald.

[145] ag^{st}, McDonald.

[146] Patente, McDonald and Bancroft.

[147] Lawnes, Bancroft, see p. 10.

[148] ag^{st}, McDonald.

[149] answer, Bancroft.

[150] part, McDonald and Bancroft.

To the second order his answere was affirmative, namely, that (his
Patent[151] notwithstanding) whensoever he should send into the baye to
trade, he would[152] be contente to putt in security to the
Governour[153] for the good behaviour of his people towardes[154] the
Indians.

[151] patente, McDonald.
[152] woulde, McDonald.

[153] Gov^r, Bancroft.

[154] towards, Bancroft.

It was at the same time further ordered by the Assembly that the
Speaker, in their names, should (as he nowe doth[155]) humbly
demaunde[156] of the Treasurer, Counsell[157] and Company an exposition
of this one clause in Captaine[158] Martin's Patente, namely, where it
is saide That he is to enjoye[159] his landes in as lardge[160] and
ample manner, to all intentes and[161] purposes, as any lord of any
manours in England dothe holde his grounde out of w^{ch} some have
collected that he might by the same graunte protecte men from paying
their debts and from diverse other dangers of lawe. The least the
Assembly can alledge against this clause is, that it is obscure, and
that it is a thing impossible for us here to knowe the Prerogatives of
all the manours in Englande. The Assembly therefore humbly beseeche[162]
their lo^{pps}[163] and the rest of that hon^{ble} house[164] that in
case they shall finde any thing in this or in any other parte of his
graunte wherby that clause towardes the conclusion of the great charter,
(viz., that all grauntes aswell of the one sorte as of the other
respectively, be made w^{th} equall favour, & graunts[165] of like
liberties & imunities[166] as neer as may be, to the ende that all
complainte[167] of partiality and indifferency[168] may be avoided,)
might[169] in any sorte be contradicted or the uniformity and
equality[170] of lawes and[171] orders extending over the whole Colony
might be impeached, That they would be pleased to remove any such
hindrance as may diverte out of the true course the free and[172]
publique current of Justice.

[155] doe, McDonald.

[156] demande, McDonald.

[157] Council, McDonald.

[158] Capt., Bancroft.

[159] enjoy, McDonald and Bancroft.

[160] large, McDonald, Bancroft.

[161] &, McDonald.

[162] beseecheth, McDonald and Bancroft.
[163] Lop^s, McDonald; Lo^{ps}, Bancroft.

[164] bourde, McDonald and Bancroft.

[165] grants, McDonald.

[166] immunities, McDonald.

[167] complaintes, McDonald, Bancroft.

[168] unindifferency, McDonald, Bancroft.

[169] mighte, McDonald.

[170] equallity, McDonald.

[171] &, McDonald.

[172] &, McDonald and Bancroft.

Upon the same grounde and[173] reason their l^{ops}, together with the
rest of the Counsell[174] and Company, are humbly besought[175] by this
general[176] assembly that if in that other clause w^{ch} exempteth
Captaine[177] Martin and his people from all services of the Colony &c.,
they shall finde any resistance against[178] that equality and[179]
uniformity of lawes and orders intended nowe by them to be established
over the whole Colony, that they would be pleased to reforme it.

[173] &, McDonald.

[174] Councill, McDonald.

[175] besoughte, McDonald.

[176] the Generall, McDonald.

[177] Captain, Bancroft.

[178] ag^{st}, McDonald.

[179] &, McDonald.

In fine, wheras[180] Captaine[181] Martin, for those ten shares allowed
him for his personal[182] adventure and[183] for his adventure of Â£70
besides, doth claim 500 acres a share, that the Treasurer, Counsell and
Company woulde vouchsafe to give notice to the Governour[184] here, what
kinde[185] of shares they meante he should have when they gave him his
Patent.[186]

[180] whereas, McDonald.

[181] Captaine, McDonald; Capt., Bancroft.

[182] personall, McDonald.

[183] &, McDonald.

[184] Govern^r, McDonald.

[185] kind, McDonald.

[186] Patente, McDonald.

The premisses about Captaine Martin thus resolved, the Committies[187]
appointed to consider what instructions are fitt to be converted into
lawes, brought in their opinions, and[188] first of some of the
general[189] instructions.

[187] Comittee, McDonald.

[188] &, McDonald.

[189] generall, McDonald.

     Here begin the lawes drawen out of the Instructions given by
     his Mat^{ies} Counsell of Virginia in England to my lo: la
     warre,[190] Captain Argall and Sir George Yeardley, knight.

[190] Lo. La Warre, McDonald and Bancroft.

By this present Generall Assembly be it enacted, that no[191] injury or
oppression be wrought by the Englishe[192] against[193] the Indians
whereby the present peace might be disturbed and antient quarrells might
be revived. And farther[194] be it ordained, that the Chicohomini are
not to be excepted out of this lawe; untill either that suche[195] order
come out of Englande, or that they doe provoke us by some newe injury.

[191] Noe, McDonald.

[192] Englishe, Bancroft.

[193] ag^{st}, McDonald.
[194] further, McDonald.

[195] such, McDonald.

Against Idlenes, Gaming, durunkenes & excesse in apparell the Assembly
hath enacted as followeth:

First, in detestation of Idlenes[196] be it enacted, that if any men be
founde to live as an Idler or renagate, though a freedman, it
shalbe[197] lawfull for that Incorporation or Plantation to w^{ch} he
belongeth to appoint him a M^r to serve for wages, till he shewe
apparant signes of amendment.

[196] Idlers, McDonald.

[197] shall be, McDonald.

Against gaming at dice[198] & Cardes be it ordained by this present
assembly that the winner or winners shall lose all his or their
winninges and[199] both winners and loosers shall forfaicte[200] ten
shillings a man, one ten shillings whereof to go to the discoverer, and
the rest to charitable & pious uses in the Incorporation where the
faulte[201] is comitted.

[198] and, Bancroft.

[199] As the McDonald copy has & in every instance where the other two
have and, the reader will bear this in mind and it will not be again
repeated.

[200] forfaite, McDonald.

[201] faults are, McDonald.

Against drunkenness be it also decreed that if any private person be
found culpable thereof, for the first time he is to be reprooved
privately by the Minister, the second time publiquely, the thirde time
to lye in boltes 12 howers in the house of the Provost Marshall & to
paye his fee,[202] and if he still continue in that vice, to undergo
suche severe punishment as the Governo^r[203] and Counsell of Estate
shall thinke fitt to be inflicted on him. But if any officer offende in
this crime, the first time he shall receive a reprooff from the
Governour, the second time he shall openly be reprooved in the churche
by the minister, and the third time he shall first be comitted and then
degraded. Provided it be understood that the Govern^r[204] hath
alwayes[205] power to restore him when he shall, in his discretion
thinke fitte.

[202] fees, McDonald.

[203] Gover^{nr}, McDonald; Govern^r, Bancroft.

[204] Gover^{nr}, McDonald; Govern^r, Bancroft.

[205] alwaies, McDonald; always, Bancroft.

Against excesse in[206] apparell that every man be cessed in the churche
for all publique contributions, if he be unmarried according to his owne
apparrell, if he be married, according to his owne and his wives, or
either of their apparell.

[206] of, McDonald.

As touching the instruction[207] of drawing some of the better disposed
of the Indians to converse w^{th} our people & to live and labour
amongst[208] them, the Assembly who knowe[209] well their dispositions
thinke it fitte to enjoine,[210] least to counsell those of the Colony,
neither utterly to rejecte them nor yet to drawe them to come in. But in
case they will of themselves come voluntarily to places well peopled,
there to doe service in killing of Deere, fishing, beatting of Corne and
other workes, that then five or six may be admitted into every such
place, and no more, and that w^{th} the consente[211] of the Governour.
Provided that good[212] guarde[213] in the night be kept upon them, for
generally (though some amongst many may proove[214] good) they are a
most trecherous people and quickly gone when they have done a villany.
And it were fitt[215] a housewe builte for them to lodge in aparte[216]
by themselves, and lone inhabitants by no meanes[217] to entertaine
them.

[207] instructions, McDonald and Bancroft.

[208] among, McDonald.

[209] know, McDonald.

[210] at inserted by Bancroft.

[211] with consente, McDonald.

[212] goode, Bancroft.

[213] guard, McDonald.
[214] prove, McDonald.

[215] fitte, Bancroft.

[216] apart, McDonald.

[217] means, Bancroft.

Be it enacted by this present assembly that for laying a surer
foundation of the conversion of the Indians to Christian Religion, eache
towne, citty, Borrough, and particular plantation do obtaine unto
themselves by just means a certaine number of the natives' children to
be educated by them in true religion and civile course of life--of
w^{ch} children the most towardly boyes in witt & graces of nature to be
brought up by them in the first elements of litterature, so[218] to be
fitted for the Colledge intended for them that from thence they may be
sente[219] to that worke of conversion.

[218] as, inserted by Bancroft.

[219] sent, McDonald.

As touching the busines of planting corne this present Assembly doth
ordaine that yeare by yeare all & every householder and householders
have in store for every servant he or they shall keep, and also for his
or their owne persons, whether they have any Servants or no, one spare
barrell of corne, to be delivered out yearly, either upon sale or
exchange as need shall require. For the neglecte[220] of w^{ch} duty he
shalbe[221] subjecte to the censure of the Govern^r[222] and Counsell of
Estate. Provided alwayes that the first yeare of every newe man this
lawe shall not be of[223] force.

[220] neglect, McDonald.

[221] shall be, McDonald.

[222] Governour, McDonald and Bancroft.

[223] in, McDonald.

About the plantation of Mulbery trees, be it enacted that every man as
he is seatted[224] upon his division, doe for seven yeares together,
every yeare plante and maintaine in growte[225] six[226] Mulberry trees
at the least,[227] and as many more as he shall thinke conveniente and
as his virtue[228] & Industry shall move him to plante, and that all
suche persons as shall neglecte the yearly planting and maintaining of
that small proportion shalbe[229] subjecte to the censure of the
Governour & the Counsell of Estate.

[224] seated, McDonald.

[225] growth, McDonald.

[226] sixe, McDonald and Bancroft.

[227] leaste, McDonald and Bancroft.

[228] vertue, McDonald.

[229] shall be, McDonald.

Be it farther[230] enacted as concerning Silke-flaxe, that those men
that are upon their division or setled[231] habitation doe this
next[232] yeare plante & dresse 100 plantes, w^{ch} being founde a
comedity,[233] may farther be increased. And whosoever do faill in the
performance of this shalbe[234] subject to this punishment of the
Governour[235] & Counsell of Estate.

[230] further, McDonald.

[231] settled, McDonald.

[232] next, McDonald.

[233] comodity, McDonald and Bancroft.

[234] shall be, McDonald.

[235] Gover^{nor}, McDonald.

For hempe also both Englishe & Indian, and for Englishe[236] flax &
Anniseeds, we do[237] require and enjoine all householders of this
Colony that have any of those seeds[238] to make tryal thereofe the
nexte season.

[236] English, Bancroft.

[237] wee doe, McDonald.

[238] seedes, Bancroft.

Moreover be it enacted by this present Assembly, that every householder
doe yearly plante and maintaine ten vines untill they have attained to
the art and experience of dressing a Vineyard either by their owne
industry or by the Instruction of some Vigneron. And that upon what
penalty soever the Governo^r[239] and Counsell of Estate shall thinke
fitt to impose upon the neglecters of this acte.

[239] Governour, McDonald and Bancroft.

Be it also enacted that all necessary tradesmen, or so[240] many as need
shall require, suche[241] as are come over since the departure of Sir
Thomas Dale, or that shall hereafter come, shall worke at their trades
for any other man, each[242] one being payde according to the
quality[243] of his trade and worke, to be estimated, if he shall not be
contented, by the Governo^r and officers of the place where he worketh.

[240] soe, McDonald.

[241] such, Bancroft.

[242] eache, McDonald and Bancroft.

[243] qualitye, Bancroft.

Be it further ordained by this General Assembly, and we doe by these
presents enacte, that all contractes[244] made in England between the
owners of lande and their Tenants and Servantes w^{ch} they shall
sende[245] hither, may be caused to be duely[246] performed, and that
the offenders be punished as the Governour[247] and Counsell of Estate
shall thinke just and convenient.

[244] contracts, McDonald.

[245] send, McDonald.

[246] duly, McDonald.

[247] Gover^{nr}, McDonald.

Be it established also by this present Assembly that no crafty or
advantagious means be suffered to be putt in practise for the inticing
awaye the Tenants or[248] Servants of any particular plantation from the
place where they are seatted. And that it shalbe[249] the duty of the
Governo^r[250] & Counsell of Estate most severely to punishe both the
seducers and the seduced, and to returne[251] these latter into their
former places.

[248] &, McDonald.

[249] shall be, McDonald.

[250] Gover^{nr}, McDonald; Governour, Bancroft.

[251] return, Bancroft.

Be it further enacted that the orders for the Magazin[252] lately made
be exactly kepte, and that the Magazin be preserved from wrong[253] and
sinister practises, and that according to the orders of courte in
Englande[254] all Tobacco and sassafras be brought[255] by the Planters
to the Cape marchant till suche time as all the goods[256] nowe or
heretofore sent for the Magazin be taken off their handes at the prices
agreed on. That by this meanes[257] the some[258] going for
Englande[259] with[260] one hande, the price thereof may be uphelde[261]
the better. And to the ende that all the whole Colony may take notice of
the last order of Courte made in Englande and all those whom it
concerneth may knowe[262] howe[263] to observe it, we[264] holde it fitt
to publishe it here for a lawe[265] among the rest of our lawes. The
w^{ch}[266] order is as followeth:

Upon the 26[267] of October, 1618, it was ordered that the Magazin[268]
should continue during[269] the terme formerly prefixed, and that
certaine[270] abuses now complained of should be reformed, and that for
preventing of all Impositions save the allowance of 25 in the hundred
proffitt, the Governo^r[271] shall have an invoice as well as the Cape
Marchant, that if any abuse in the sale of the[272] goods be offered,
wee,[273] upon Intelligence and due examination thereof, shall see it
correctede. And for the incouragement[274] of particular hundreds, as
Smythe's hundred, Martin's hundred, Lawnes' hundred, and the like, it is
agreed that what comodities are reaped upon anie of these General[275]
Colonies, it shalbe lawefull for them to returne the same to their owne
adventurers. Provided that the same[276] comodity be of their owne
growing, w^{th}out trading w^{th} any other, in one entyre lumpe and not
dispersed, and that at the determination of the jointe stocke, the goods
then remaining in the Magazin[277] shalbe[278] bought by the said
particular Colonies before any other goods w^{ch} shall be sente by
private men. And it was moreover ordered that if the lady la warre, the
Lady Dale, Captain Bargrave and the rest, would unite themselves into a
settled[279] Colony they might be capable of the same priviledges that
are graunted to any of the foresaid hundreds. Hitherto the order.

[252] magazine, McDonald.

[253] wronge, McDonald.
[254] England, McDonald.

[255] Sassafras brought, McDonald; to be brought, Bancroft.

[256] goodes, Bancroft.

[257] means, Bancroft.

[258] same, McDonald and Bancroft.

[259] England, McDonald.

[260] into, McDonald and Bancroft.

[261] upheld, Bancroft.

[262] know, McDonald.

[263] how, McDonald.

[264] wee, McDonald.

[265] Law, McDonald.

[266] which, McDonald.

[267] 26th, McDonald and Bancroft.

[268] Magazine, McDonald.

[269] duringe, McDonald.

[270] certain, Bancroft.

[271] Governour, McDonald and Bancroft.

[272] the, omitted by McDonald.

[273] wee, McDonald, Bancroft.

[274] encouragement, McDonald.

[275] severall, McDonald; several, Bancroft; this word evidently the
proper one.

[276] said, McDonald, Bancroft.
[277] magazine, McDonald.

[278] shall be, McDonald.

[279] setled, Bancroft.

All[280] the general Assembly by voices concluded not only the
acceptance and observation of this order, but of the Instruction also to
Sir George Yeardley next preceding the same. Provided first, that the
Cape Marchant do[281] accepte of the Tobacco of all and everie the
Planters here in Virginia, either for Goods or upon billes of Exchange
at three shillings the pounde the beste, and 18d the second sorte.
Provided also that the billes be only payde in Englande. Provided, in
the third place, that if any other besides the Magazin[282] have at any
time any necessary comodity w^{ch} the Magazine doth wante, it shall and
may be lawfull for any of the Colony to buye[283] the said necessary
comodity of the said party, but upon the termes of the Magazin[284] viz:
allowing no more gaine then 25 in the hundred, and that with the leave
of the Governour. Provided lastely,[285] that it may be lawfull[286] for
the Govern^r[287] to give leave to any Mariner, or any other person,
that shall have any suche necessary comodity wanting to the Magazin[288]
to carrie home for England so muche[289] Tobacco or other naturall
comodities of the Country[290] as his Customers shall pay him for the
said necessary comodity or comodities. And to the ende we may not only
persuade and incite men, but inforce them also thoroughly and loyally
to aire their Tobacco before they bring it to the Magazine,[291] be it
enacted, and by these presents we doe enacte, that if upon the Judgement
of power sufficient even of any incorporation where the Magazine[292]
shall reside, (having first taken their oaths to give true sentence,
twoe whereof to be chosen by the Cape Marchant and twoe by the
Incorporation,) any Tobacco whatsoever shall not proove[293] vendible at
the second price, that it shall there imediately be burnt before the
owner's face. Hitherto suche lawes as were drawen out of the
Instructions.

[280] And, Bancroft.

[281] doe, McDonald.

[282] magazine, McDonald.

[283] buy, McDonald.

[284] magazine, McDonald.

[285] lastly, McDonald.
[286] lawful, McDonald.

[287] Governour, McDonald and Bancroft.

[288] As this word is spelt by McDonald in every instance with the final
e this note will not be repeated.

[289] much, McDonald.

[290] countrey, McDonald.

[291] Magazin, Bancroft.

[292] do., do.

[293] prove, Bancroft.


TUESDAY, Aug. 3,[294] 1619.

This morning a thirde[295] sorte of lawes (suche as might proceed out of
every man's private conceipt[296]) were read and referred by halves to
the same comitties[297] w^{ch} were from the beginning.

[294] 3rd, Bancroft.

[295] third, Bancroft.

[296] conceipte, McDonald and Bancroft.

[297] comittees, McDonald.

This done, Captaine[298] William Powell presented to the Assembly a
petition to have justice against a lewde[299] and trecherous servante of
his who by false accusation given up in writing to the Governo^r[300]
sought not onely to gett[301] him deposed from his government of James
citty and utterly (according to the Proclamation) to be degraded from
the place and title of a Captaine, but to take his life from him also.
And so out of the said Petition sprang this order following:

Captaine William Powell presented a Petition to the generall[302]
Assembly against[303] one Thomas Garnett, a servant of his, not onely
for extreame neglect of his business to the great loss[304] and
prejudice of the said Captaine, and for openly and impudently abusing
his house, in sight both of Master and Mistresse, through wantonnes[305]
w^{th} a woman servant of theirs, a widdowe, but also for falsely
accusing him to the Governo^r[306] both of Drunkenes &[307] Thefte, and
besides for bringing all[308] his fellow servants to testifie[309] on
his side, wherein they justly failled[310] him. It was thought fitt by
the general assembly (the Governour himselfe[311] giving sentence), that
he should stand[312] fower dayes with his eares nayled to the Pillory,
viz: Wednesday, Aug. 4^{th}, and so likewise Thursday, fryday and
Satturday[313] next following, and every of those fower dayes should be
publiquely whipped. Now, as touching the neglecte of his worke, what
satisfaction ought to be made to his M^r for that is referred to the
Governour and Counsell of Estate.

[298] Capt., Bancroft.

[299] lewd, McDonald.

[300] Governour, McDonald and Bancroft.

[301] get, McDonald.

[302] General, McDonald.

[303] ag^{st}, McDonald.

[304] losse, McDonald and Bancroft.

[305] wantonnes, McDonald; wantonness, Bancroft.

[306] Governour, McDonald and Bancroft.

[307] McDonald omits the &; Bancroft, nor and.

[308] McDonald omits the all.

[309] certifie, Bancroft.

[310] failed, McDonald, Bancroft.

[311] himself, McDonald.

[312] stande, McDonald, Bancroft.

[313] Saturday, Bancroft.

The same morning the lawes abovewritten, drawen out of the instructions,
were read, and one by one thoroughly examined, and then passed once
again[314] the general[315] consente of the whole Assembly.
[314] againe, McDonald, Bancroft.

[315] generall, McDonald, Bancroft.

This afternoon the committies brought in a reporte, what they had done
as concerning the third sorte of lawes, the discussing whereof spente
the residue of that daye. Excepte onely the consideration of a petition
of M^r John Rolfes againste Captaine John Martine[316] for writing a
letter to him wherein (as M^r Rolfe alledgeth) he taxeth him both
unseemly[317] and amisse of certaine thinges[318] wherein he was never
faulty, and besides, casteth some aspersion upon the present government,
w^{ch} is the most temperate and juste[319] that ever was in this
country, too milde, indeed, for many of[320] this Colony, whom
unwoonted[321] liberty hath made insolente and not to knowe[322]
themselves. This Petition of M^r Rolfes' was thought fitt to be referred
to the Counsell of State.

[316] Martin, McDonald.

[317] unseemingly, Bancroft.

[318] things, McDonald, Bancroft.

[319] just, McDonald.

[320] in, McDonald.

[321] unwonted, McDonald.

[322] know, McDonald.


WEDENSDAY, Aug. 4^{th}.

This daye (by reason of extream heat, both paste and likely to ensue,
and by that meanes of the alteration of the healthes of diverse of the
general Assembly) the Governour, who[323] himselfe also[324] was not
well, resolved should be the last of this first session; so in the
morning the Speaker (as he was required by the Assembly) redd over all
the lawes and orders that had formerly passed the house, to give the
same yett one reviewe[325] more, and to see whether there were any thing
to be amended or that might be excepted againste. This being done, the
third sorte of lawes w^{ch} I am nowe coming[326] to sett downe, were
read over throughly[327] discussed, w^{ch}, together w^{th} the former,
did now passe the laste and finall consente of the General[328]
Assembly.
[323] who, omitted by McDonald.

[324] who, inserted by McDonald.

[325] review, McDonald.

[326] cominge, McDonald.

[327] thoroughly, McDonald.

[328] generall, McDonald.


A third sorte of lawes, suche as may[329] issue out of every man's
private[330] conceipte.


It shalbe free for every man to trade w^{th} the Indians, servants onely
excepted, upon paine of whipping, unless the M^r will[331] redeeme it
off w^{th} the payment of an Angell, one-fourth parte whereofe to
go[332] to the Provost Marshall, one fourth parte to the discoverer, and
the other moyty to the publique uses of the Incorporation.[333]

[329] maye, Bancroft.

[330] privat, McDonald, Bancroft.

[331] will, omitted by McDonald.

[332] goe, McDonald.

[333] where he dwelleth, added in McDonald copy.

That no man doe[334] sell or give any of the greatter howes to the
Indians, or any Englishe[335] dog of quality, as a mastive,[336]
greyhound, bloodhounde, lande or water spaniel, or any other dog or
bitche whatsoever, of the Englishe race, upon paine of forfaiting
5^s[337] sterling to the publique uses of the Incorporation where he
dwelleth.

[334] do, McDonald, Bancroft.

[335] English, McDonald.

[336] mastiffe, McDonald.

[337] 5^b, McDonald; Â£5, Bancroft.

That no man do sell or give any Indians any piece shott or poulder, or
any other armes, offensive or defensive, upon paine of being held a
Traytour to the Colony, and of being hanged as soon as the facte[338] is
proved, w^{th}out all redemption.[339]

[338] Fact, McDonald.

[339] In the McDonald copy this and the paragraph next preceding are
transposed.

That no man may go above twenty miles from his dwelling-place, nor upon
any voiage whatsoever shalbe absent from thence for the space of seven
dayes together w^{th}out first having made the Governo^r[340] or
comaunder of the same place acquainted therw^{th},[341] upon paine[342]
of paying twenty shillinges[343] to the publique uses of the same
Incorporation where the party delinquent dwelleth.

[340] Governour, McDonald, Bancroft.

[341] therewith, McDonald, Bancroft.

[342] penalty, McDonald.

[343] shillings, Bancroft.

That noe man shall purposely goe to any Indian townes, habitations or
places of resort[344] w^{th}out leave from the Governo^r[345] or
comaunder[346] of that place where he liveth, upon paine of paying 40^s
to publique uses as aforesaid.

[344] resorte, McDonald, Bancroft.

[345] Gover^{nr}, McDonald; Governour, Bancroft.

[346] comander, McDonald; comand^r, Bancroft.

That no man living in this Colony, but shall between this and the first
of January nexte ensuing come or sende to the Secretary of Estate[347]
to enter his own and all his servants' names, and for what terme or upon
what conditions they are to serve, upon penalty of paying 40^s to the
said Secretary of Estate.[348] Also, whatsoever M^{rs} or people
doe[349] come over to this plantation that within[350] one month of
their arrivall (notice being first given them of this very lawe) they
shall likewise resorte to the Secretary of Estate[351] and shall
certifie him upon what termes or conditions they be come hither, to the
ende that he may recorde their grauntes and comissions, and for how long
time and upon what conditions[352] their servants (in case they have
any) are to serve them, and that upon paine of the penalty nexte above
mentioned.

[347] State, McDonald.

[348] State, McDonald.

[349] do., Bancroft.

[350] w^{th}in, McDonald.

[351] State, McDonald.

[352] In the McDonald copy, from the word conditions, in the third line
above, to this point are omitted.

All Ministers in the Colony shall once a year, namely, in the moneth of
Marche, bring to the Secretary of Estate a true account of all
Christenings, burials and marriages, upon paine, if they faill, to be
censured for their negligence by the Governo^r[353] and Counsell[354] of
Estate; likewise, where there be no ministers, that the comanders of the
place doe supply the same duty.

[353] Governour, McDonald, Bancroft.

[354] Councill, McDonald.

No man, w^{th}out leave of the Governo^r, shall kill any Neatt cattle
whatsoever, young or olde, especially kine, Heyfurs or cow-calves, and
shalbe[355] carefull to preserve their steeres[356] and oxen, and to
bring them to the plough and such profitable uses, and w^{th}out having
obtained leave as aforesaid, shall not kill them, upon penalty of
forfaiting the value of the beast so killed.

[355] shall be, McDonald, Bancroft.

[356] steers, McDonald.

Whosoever shall take any of his neighbours' boates, oares, or canoas
w^{th}out leave from the owner shalbe held[357] and esteemed as a felon
and so proceeded againste;[358] tho[359] hee that shall take away by
violence or stelth any canoas or other thinges from the Indians shall
make valuable restitution to the said Indians, and shall forfaict, if
he be a freeholder, five pound; if a servant, 40^s, or endure a
whipping; and anything under the value of 13^d[360] shall be accounted
Petty larceny.

[357] helde, McDonald, Bancroft.

[358] against, McDonald, Bancroft.

[359] also McDonald, Bancroft.

[360] ob., McDonald.

All ministers shall duely read divine service, and exercise their
ministerial function according to the Ecclesiastical lawes and orders of
the churche[361] of Englande, and every Sunday in the afternoon[362]
shall Catechize suche as are not yet ripe to come to the Com.[363] And
whosoever of them shalbe[364] found negligent or faulty in this kinde
shalbe subject to the censure of the Govern^r and Counsell of Estate.

[361] Church, McDonald.

[362] afternoone, McDonald.

[363] comunion, McDonald, Bancroft.

[364] shall be, McDonald.

The Ministers and Churchwardens shall seeke to presente[365] all ungodly
disorders, the comitters wherofe[366] if, upon goode[367] admonitions
and milde reprooff,[368] they will not forbeare the said skandalous
offenses,[369] as suspicions of whordomes,[370] dishonest company
keeping with weomen and suche[371] like, they are to be presented and
punished accordingly.

[365] prevente, McDonald.

[366] whereof, McDonald, Bancroft.

[367] good, McDonald, Bancroft.

[368] reproofe, McDonald.

[369] offences, McDonald.

[370] whoredoms, McDonald.

[371] such, McDonald.

If any person after two warnings, doe[372] not amende[373] his or her
life in point[374] of evident suspicion of Incontincy[375] or of the
comission[376] of any other enormous sinnes,[377] that then he or shee
be presented by the Churchwardens and suspended for a time from the
churche by the minister. In w^{ch} Interim if the same person do[378]
not amende and humbly submit[379] him or herselfe to the churche, he is
then fully to be excomunicate and soon after a writt or warrant to be
sent[380] from the Govern^r[381] for the apprehending of his person ande
seizing on[382] all his goods. Provided alwayes, that all the ministers
doe meet[383] once a quarter, namely, at the feast of S^t Michael the
Arkangell, of the nativity of our saviour, of the Annuntiation of the
blessed Virgine, and about midsomer, at[384] James citty or any other
place where the Governo^r[385] shall reside, to determine whom it is
fitt to excomunicate, and that they first presente their opinion to the
Governo^r[386] ere they proceed to the acte of excomunication.

[372] do., Bancroft.

[373] amend, Bancroft.

[374] pointe, McDonald.

[375] Incontinency, McDonald, Bancroft.

[376] commission, McDonald.

[377] suines, Bancroft.

[378] doe, McDonald.

[379] submitt, McDonald, Bancroft.

[380] sente, McDonald, Bancroft.

[381] Governour, Bancroft.

[382] McDonald omits on.

[383] meete, McDonald.

[384] att., McDonald.

[385] Gover^{nr}, McDonald; Governour, Bancroft.

[386] Governour, McDonald, Bancroft.

For reformation of swearing, every freeman and M^r of a family after
thrise admonition shall give 5s or the value upon present[387] demaunde,
to the use of the church where he dwelleth; and every servant after the
like admonition, excepte his M^r dischardge[388] the fine, shalbe
subject to whipping. Provided, that the payment of the fine
notw^{th}standing, the said servant shall acknowledge his faulte
publiquely in the Churche.

[387] presente, McDonald.

[388] discharge, McDonald.

No man whatsoever, coming by water from above, as from Henrico, Charles
citty, or any place from the westwarde of James citty, and being bound
for Kiccowtan,[389] or any other parte on this side,[390] the same shall
presume to pass by, either by day or by night, w^{th}out touching firste
here at James citty to knowe[391] whether the Governo^r[392] will
comande him any service. And the like shall they performe that come from
Kicawtan[393] ward, or from any place between this and that, to go
upwarde, upon paine of forfaiting ten pound sterling a time to the
Govern^r[394]. Provided, that if a servant having had instructions from
his Master to observe this lawe,[395] doe, notw^{th}standing,
transgresse the same, that then the said[396] servant shalbe punished at
the Govern^{r's} discretion; otherwise, that the master himselfe shall
undergo the foresaid penalty.

[389] Kicowtan, Bancroft.

[390] of, inserted by McDonald.

[391] know, McDonald.

[392] Governour, McDonald, Bancroft.

[393] Kiccowtan, McDonald, Bancroft.

[394] Governor, McDonald, Bancroft.

[395] McDonald reads, observe his service.

[396] s^d, McDonald.

No man shall trade[397] into the baye, either in shallop, pinnace, or
ship, w^{th}out the Govern^{r's}[398] license, and w^{th}out putting in
security that neither himself nor his Company shall force or wrong the
Indians, upon paine that, doing otherwise, they shalbe censured at their
returne by the Govern^{or}[399] and Counsell[400] of Estate.

[397] shall have trade, Bancroft.

[398] Governour's, McDonald, Bancroft.

[399] Governour, McDonald; Gov^r, Bancroft.

[400] Councell, McDonald.

All persons whatsoever upon the Sabaoth daye[401] shall frequente divine
service and sermons both forenoon and afternoon, and all suche as beare
armes shall bring[402] their pieces, swordes, poulder and shotte. And
every one that shall transgresse this lawe shall forfaicte[403] three
shillinges[404] a time to the use of the churche, all lawful and
necessary impediments excepted. But if a servant in this case shall
wilfully neglecte his M^{r's} comande he shall suffer bodily
punishmente.

[401] days, McDonald, Bancroft.

[402] bringe, McDonald.

[403] forfaict, Bancroft.

[404] shillings, Bancroft.

No maide or woman servant, either now resident in the Colonie or
hereafter to come, shall contract herselfe in marriage w^{th}out either
the consente of her parents, or of her M^r or M^{ris}, or of the
magistrat[405] and minister of the place both together. And whatsoever
minister shall marry or contracte any suche persons w^{th}out some of
the foresaid consentes shalbe[406] subjecte to the severe censure of the
Govern^r[407] and Counsell[408] of Estate.

[405] magistrate, McDonald.

[406] shall be, McDonald, Bancroft.

[407] Gover^{nr}, McDonald; Gov^r, Bancroft.

[408] Council, McDonald.

Be it enacted by this[409] present assembly that whatsoever servant hath
heretofore or shall hereafter contracte himselfe in England, either by
way of Indenture or otherwise, to serve any Master here in Virginia and
shall afterward, against[410] his said former contracte, depart from his
M^r w^{th}out leave, or, being once imbarked, shall abandon the ship he
is appointed to come in, and so, being lefte behinde, shall putt[411]
himselfe into the service of any other man that will bring him hither,
that then at the same servant's arrival here, he shall first serve out
his time with that M^r that brought him hither and afterward also shall
serve out his time[412] w^{th} his former M^r according to his covenant.

[409] the, McDonald.

[410] ag^{st}, McDonald.

[411] put, McDonald, Bancroft.

[412] McDonald omits the words, with that M^r that brought him hither
and afterwards also shall serve out his time.

Here ende the lawes.

All these lawes being thus concluded and consented to as aforesaide[413]
Captaine Henry Spellman[414] was called to the barre to answere to
certaine misdemeano^{rs} layde to his chardge by Robert Poole,
interpretour, upon his oath (whose examination the Governo^r sente into
England in the Prosperus), of w^{ch} accusations of Poole some he
acknowledged for true, but the greattest[415] part he denyed. Whereupon
the General[416] Assembly, having throughly heard and considered his
speaches, did constitute this order following against him:

AUG. 4^{th}, 1619.

This day Captaine Henry Spelman[417] was convented before the General
Assembly and was examined by a relation upon oath of one Robert Poole,
Interpreter, what conference had passed between the said Spelman[418]
and Opochancano at Poole's meeting with him in Opochancano's courte.
Poole chardgeth him he spake very unreverently and maliciously
against[419] this present Govern^r,[420] wherby the honour and dignity
of his place and person, and so of the whole Colonie, might be brought
into contempte, by w^{ch} meanes what mischiefs might ensue from the
Indians by disturbance of the peace or otherwise, may easily be
conjectured. Some thinges of this relation Spelman confessed, but the
most parte he denyed, excepte onely one matter of importance, & that was
that he hade informed Opochancano that w^{th}in a yeare there would come
a Governo^r[421] greatter then[422] this that nowe is in place. By
w^{ch} and by other reportes it seemeth he hath alienated the minde of
Opochancano from this present Governour, and brought him in much
disesteem, both w^{th} Opochancano[423] and the Indians, and the whole
Colony in danger of their slippery designes.

[413] Aforesaid, Bancroft.

[414] Spelman, McDonald.

[415] greatest, McDonald.

[416] gen^l, Bancroft.

[417] Spellman, Bancroft.

[418] Spellman, Bancroft.

[419] ag^{st}, McDonald.

[420] Governour, Bancroft.

[421] Governour, McDonald, Bancroft.

[422] than, McDonald, Bancroft.

[423] Opochancanos, McDonald.

The general assembly upon Poole's testimony onely not willing to putt
Spelman to the rigour and extremity of the lawe, w^{ch} might, perhaps
both speedily and deservedly, have taken his life from him (upon the
witness[424] of one whom he muche excepted against) were pleased, for
the present, to censure him rather out of that his confession above
written then[425] out of any other prooffe. Several and sharpe
punishments were pronounced against[426] him by diverse of the Assembly,
But in fine the whole course[427] by voices united did encline to the
most favourable, w^{ch} was that for this misdemeanour[428] he should
first be degraded of his title of Captaine,[429] at the head of the
troupe, and should be condemned to performe seven yeares service to the
Colony in the nature of Interpreter to the Governour.

[424] witnes, McDonald, Bancroft.

[425] than, Bancroft.

[426] ag^{st}, McDonald.

[427] courte, McDonald, Bancroft.
[428] misdemeanor, McDonald; misdemean^r, Bancroft.

[429] Capt., McDonald.

This sentence being read to Spelman he, as one that had in him more of
the Savage then of the Christian, muttered certaine wordes to himselfe
neither shewing any remorse for his offences, nor yet any thankfulness
to the Assembly for theire sofavourable censure, w^{ch} he at one time
or another (God's grace not wholly abandoning him) might w^{th} some one
service have been able to have redeemed.[O]

[O] This paragraph appears only in the McDonald copy, and in that it has
two rows of lines at right angles to each other and diagonally across
it, as if to indicate that this portion of the record was considered as
being improperly made or, perhaps, was not official.

This day also did the Inhabitants of Paspaheigh, alias Argall's towne,
present a petition to the general assembly to give them an absolute
dischardge from certaine bondes wherin they stand bound to Captain
Samuell Argall for the paym^t of 600^G,[430] and to Captain William
Powell, at Captaine Argall's appointment, for the paym^t of 50^G[431]
more. To Captaine Argall for 15 skore acres of wooddy ground, called by
the name of Argal's[432] towne or Paspaheigh; to Captaine Powell in
respect of his paines in clearing the grounde and building the houses,
for w^{ch} Captaine[433] Argal ought to have given him satisfaction.
Nowe,[434] the general assembly being doubtful whether they have any
power and authority to dischardge the said bondes, doe by these
presents[435] (at the Instance of the said Inhabitants[436] of
Paspaheighs, alias Martin's hundred people) become most humble sutours
to the Tresurer, Counsell and Company in England that they wilbe[437]
pleased to gett the said bondes for 600^G[438] to be cancelled;
forasmuche as in their great comission they have expressly and by name
appointed that place of Paspaheigh for parte of the Governo^r's[439]
lande. And wheras Captain[440] William Powell is payde[441] his 50^G
w^{ch} Captaine[442] Argall enjoined the saide Inhabitantes to presente
him with, as parte[443] of the bargaine, the general assembly, at their
intreaty, do become sutours on their behalfe, that Captaine Argall, by
the Counsell & Company in England, may be compelled either to restore
the said 50^G[444] from thence, or else that restitution therof be made
here out of the goods of the said Captaine Argall.

[430] 600^{Li}, McDonald; Â£60, Bancroft.

[431] 50^{li}, McDonald; Â£50, Bancroft.

[432] Argall's, McDonald.
[433] Capt., Bancroft.

[434] now, McDonald.

[435] presentes, McDonald, Bancroft.

[436] Inhabit^{ts}, Bancroft.

[437] will be, McDonald, Bancroft.

[438] 600^{li}, McDonald; Â£60, Bancroft.

[439] Governours, McDonald, Bancroft.

[440] Captaine, McDonald, Bancroft.

[441] paide, Bancroft.

[442] Capt., Bancroft.

[443] part, Bancroft.

[444] 50^{li}, McDonald; Â£50, Bancroft.

The last acte of the Generall Assembly was a contribution to gratifie
their officers, as followeth:[P]

[P] This paragraph is in the McDonald and Bancroft copies but not in De
Jarnette's.

AUG. 4^{th}, 1619.

It is fully agreed at this generall[445] Assembly that in regarde of the
great[446] paines and labour of the[447] Speaker of this Assembly (who
not onely[448] first formed the same Assembly and to their great ease &
expedition reduced all matters to be treatted of into a ready method,
but also his indisposition notw^{th}standing wrote or dictated all
orders and other expedients and is yet[449] to write severall bookes for
all the Generall[450] Incorporations and plantations both of the great
charter, and of all the lawes) and likewise in respecte of the
dilligence of the Clerke and sergeant, officers thereto belonging. That
every man and manservant of above 16 yeares of age shall pay into the
handes and Custody of the Burgesses of every Incorporation and
plantation one pound of the best Tobacco, to be distributed to the
Speaker and likewise to the Clerke and sargeant of the Assembly,
according to their degrees and rankes, the whole bulke whereof to be
delivered into the Speaker's handes, to be divided accordingly. And in
regarde[451] the Provost Marshall of James citty hath also given some
attendance upon the said Generall Assembly, he is also to have a share
out of the same. And this is to begin to be gathered the 24^{th} of
February nexte.

[445] general, McDonald.

[446] greate, Bancroft.

[447] this, McDonald.

[448] only, McDonald.

[449] yett, Bancroft.

[450] severall, McDonald, Bancroft.

[451] regard to, McDonald; regard, Bancroft.

In conclusion, the whole Assembly comaunded[452] the Speaker (as nowe he
doth) to present their humble excuse to the Treasurer[453] Counsell &
Company in England for being constrained by the intemperature of the
weather and the falling sick of diverse of the Burgesses to breake up so
abruptly--before they had so much as putt their lawes to the ingrossing.
This they wholly comited to[454] the fidelity of their speaker, who
therin[455] (his conscience telles him) hath done the parte[456] of an
honest man, otherwise he would be easily founde[457] out by the
Burgesses themselves, who w^{th} all expedition are to have so many
bookes of the same lawes as there be both Incorporations and Plantations
in the Colony.

[452] comanded, McDonald, Bancroft.

[453] Tresurer, McDonald, Bancroft.

[454] in, Bancroft.

[455] therein, McDonald.

[456] part, McDonald.

[457] woulde easily be found, McDonald; would easily be founde,
Bancroft.

In the seconde place, the Assembly doth most humbly crave pardon that in
so shorte[458] a space they could bring their matter to no[459] more
perfection, being for the present enforced to sende home titles rather
then lawes, Propositions rather then resolutions, Attemptes then
Acchievements, hoping their courtesy will accepte our poore indevour,
and their wisedome wilbe[460] ready to supporte the weaknes of this
little flocke.

[458] short, McDonald.

[459] no, omitted by McDonald.

[460] will be, McDonald, Bancroft.

Thirdly, the General Assembly doth humbly beseech[461] the said
Treasurer,[462] Counsell & Company, that albeit it belongeth to them
onely to allowe or to abrogate any lawes w^{ch} we shall here make,[463]
and that it is their right so to doe,[464] yet that it would please them
not to take it in ill parte if these lawes w^{ch} we have nowe brought
to light, do passe currant[465] & be of force till suche time as we[466]
may knowe their farther pleasure out of Englande: for otherwise this
people (who nowe at length have gotte[467] the raines[468] of former
servitude into their owne swindge) would in shorte time growe so
insolent, as they would shake off all government, and there would be no
living among them.

[461] beseeche, McDonald.

[462] Tresurer, McDonald.

[463] inacte, McDonald, Bancroft.

[464] righte soe to do, McDonald; right so to doe, Bancroft.

[465] current, Bancroft.

[466] wee, McDonald.

[467] gott, McDonald; got, Bancroft.

[468] reines, McDonald; raines, Bancroft.

Their last humble suite is,[469] that the said Counsell & Company would
be pleased, so soon as they shall finde[470] it convenient, to make
good their promise sett downe[471] at the conclusion of their comission
for establishing the Counsel[472] of Estate & the General[473] Assembly,
namely, that they will give us power to allowe or disallowe of their
orders of Courte, as his Ma^{ty}[474] hath given them power to allowe or
to reject[475] our lawes.

[469] suit, McDonald.

[470] find, McDonald.

[471] down, McDonald.

[472] Counsell, McDonald, Bancroft.

[473] Generall, McDonald.

[474] Majesty, McDonald; Ma^{ty}, Bancroft.

[475] rejecte, McDonald, Bancroft.

In sume Sir George Yeardley, the Governo^r[476] prorogued the said
General[477] Assembly till the firste of Marche, which is to fall out
this present yeare of 1619, and in the mean season dissolved the same.

[476] Gover^{nr}, McDonald; Governour, Bancroft.

[477] Generall, McDonald.

_FINIS._

I certify that the foregoing is a true and
authentic copy taken from the volume
above named.

JOHN McDONAGH,
Record Agent.
July 14th, 1871.

The McDonald copy has the following after Finis:

(in Dorso.)
1619.
The proceedings of the first Assembly of Virginia. July 1619.
True Copy,
AUGUSTUS AUSTEN BURT.




LISTS

OF THE

LIVINGE & THE DEAD IN VIRGINIA


February 16, 1623.




_EDITORS' NOTE._


The paper from which this document is printed is to be found in the
first volume of the McDonald papers. It is such a census of the
inhabitants of the colony as the historical student would like to see
made out at several other periods of our colonial history. We can find
no legal enactment requiring such a census to be taken, and no order to
that effect, save in the Instructions to Governor Wyatt, dated 24th
July, 1621, where, among other things, he is directed "To make a
catalogue of the people in every plantation, and their conditions; and
of deaths, marriages and christenings."--Hening, Vol. I., p. 115.

The entries are as brief as possible, no middle names are given, and
foreigners are entered according to nationality, or not more than one
name allowed them. Not the least curious is the small number of negroes.
Rolfe states, "About the last of August (1619) came in a Dutch man of
warre that sold us twenty Negors" (Smith, p. 126), and nearly five years
after, when this census was taken, there were but twenty-two in the
Colony.




STATE PAPER OFFICE. }
COLONIAL.           }
_Volume 3, No. 2._  }

LISTS OF THE LIVINGE & DEAD IN VIRGINIA

Feb. 16th, 1623.


A LIST OF THE LIVINGE.

_At the Colledg Land._[Q]

  Thomas Marlett,
  Christopher Branch,
  Francis Boot,
  William Browning,
  Walter Cooper,
  William Welder,
  Leonard More,
  Daniell Shurley,
  Peeter Jorden,
  Nicholas Perse,
  William Dalbie,
  Isaias Rawton,
  Theoder Moises,
  Robert Champer,
  Thomas Jones,
  David Williams,
  William Walker,
  Edward Hobson,
  Thomas Hobson,
  John Day,
  William Cooksey,
  Robert Farnell,
  Nicholas Chapman,
  Mathew Edlow,
  William Price,
  Gabriell Holland,
  John Wattson,
  Ebedmeleck Gastrell,
  Thomas Osborne.          29

[Q] _The Colledge Land._--In "1619 Sir Edwin Sandys moved and obtained
that ten thousand acres of land should be laid off for the University at
Henrico, a place formerly resolved on for that purpose. This was
intended as well for the colledge for the education of the Indians as
also to lay the foundation of a seminary of learning for the
English."--Stith, London ed., p. 163.

"On the northerly side of James river, from the falls down to Henrico,
containing ten miles in length, are the public lands reserved and laid
out, whereof ten thousand are for the University lands, three thousand
are for the company's lands, with other lands belonging to the
College."--MS. in the McDonald paper, entitled "Particulars of Land in
Virginia," which was made out in 1625 or '6, the communication of the
Governor in which he informs their lordships that he sends it, being
dated May 17, 1626. McDonald papers, Vol. I., pp. 295-307.

At the first meeting of the Burgesses (1619) the College had no
representative, but at the meeting held Oct. 16, 1629, the Burgesses
"For the plantations at the Colledge were Leftn't Thomas Osborne and
Mathew Edlowe," whose names are in the text. See Hening, Vol. I., p.
138.


_Att the Neak of Land._[R]

  Luke Boys,
  Mrs. Boys,
  Robert Halam,
  Joseph Royall,
  John Dods,
  Mrs. Dods,
  Elizabeth Perkinson,
  William Vincent,
  Mrs. Vincent,
  Allexander Bradwaye,
    his wife Bradwaye,
  John Price,
    his wife Price,
  Robert Turner,
  Nathaniell Reeve,
  Serjeant William Sharp,
  Mrs. Sharp,
  Richard Rawse,
  Thomas Sheppy,
  William Clemens,
  Ann Woodley,
  Thomas Harris,
    his wife Harris,
  Margaret Berman,
  Thomas Farmer,
  Hugh Hilton,
  Richard Taylor,
    _uxor_ Taylor,
  Joshua Chard,
  Christopher Browne,
  Thomas Oage,
    _uxor_ Oage,
    infant Oage,
  Henry Coltman,
  Hugh Price,
    _uxor_ Price,
    infant Price,
  Mrs. Coltman,
  Robert Greene,
    _uxor_ Greene,
    infant Greene.

[R] _Neak of Land._--"There is another division of the country into
necks of land, which are the boundaries of the Escheators, viz: the
Northern Neck, between the Patowmeck and Rappahannock rivers.

"The neck between Rappahannock and York rivers, within which Pamunkey
Neck is included.

"The neck between York and James rivers," &c., &c.--Beverly, Book IV.,
chap. ii.

This list being made up at James city this neck might be the one nearest
to that place, and therefore the last one named by Beverly would be the
one referred to; but inasmuch as in this MS. list it follows immediately
after the College land, and in the list of Burgesses for 1629, occupies
the same position, it is not improbable that it refers to the peninsula
opposite Henrico, known on all the maps of the State as Farrar's island,
and which has been made an island in reality by the completion of the
canal begun by the United States army during the late civil war and
afterwards finished by the engineer department of the same, under the
direction of Col. W.P. Craighill. Hening reports Serit Sharpe a Burgess
for this place in 1629, and Serjeant William Sharp is named in the text
as living there in 1626.


_Att West & Sherlow Hundred._[S]

  John Harris,
  Dorothe Harris,
    Infants { Harris,
            { Harris,
  Thomas Floyd,
  Ellias Longe,
  William Nichollas,
  Roger Ratcliffe,         78
  Robert Milver,
  Robert Parttin,
  Margaret Parttin,
    infantes { Parttin,
             { Parttin,
  Henry Benson,
  Nicholas Blackman,
  Nathanell Tattam,
  Mathew Gloster,
  Symon Surgis,
  Nicholas Baley,
  Ann Bayley,
  Eliner Phillips,
  Thomas Paulett,
  Thomas Baugh,
  Thomas Packer,
  Jonas Bayley,
  John Trussell,
  Christopher Beane,
  John Cartter,
  Henry Bagwell,
  Thomas Bagwell,
  Edward Gardiner,
  Richard Biggs,
  Richard Biggs,
  William Biggs, }
  Thomas Biggs,  } Sons
  Richard Biggs, }
  William Askew,
  Henry Carman,
  Andrew Dudley,
  James Gay,
  Anthony Burrows,
  Rebecca Rosse,
  sons { Rosse,
       { Rosse,
  Petters, a maid.

[S] _West & Sherlow Hundred._--Sir Thomas Dale annexed to New Bermuda
"many miles of champion and wood land ground in several hundreds, by the
names of Nether Hundred, Shirley Hundred," &c.--Stith, p. 124-'5; Smith,
General Historie, 1627, p. 111. Hening names Burgesses (1629) from
Shirley Hundred island and Shirley Hundred maine, and among the latter
is the name of John Harris, which appears in the text.--Heming Vol. I.,
p. 138.

The name of Shirley appears on the Fry and Jefferson map only at the
place where the same is now located, opposite Bermuda Hundred, and well
known as the residence of Hill Carter, Esq. A short distance below is an
island not named on that map, but on modern maps as Eppes island, which
we may presume was Shirley island. We do not find the name of West in
the connection except in a paper entitled John Rolfe's relation to the
State of Virginia, written in 1616, in which we learn that West and
Shirley Hundred was about thirty-seven miles above James citie, which
corresponds with the location above named. See Virginia Historical
Register, Vol. I., p. 110.


_Att Jordan's Jorney._[T]

  Siselye Jordan,
  Temperance Bayliffe,
  Mary Jordan,
  Margery Jordan,
  William Farrar,
  Thomas Williams,
  Roger Preston,
  Thomas Brookes,
  John Peede,
  John Freme,
  Richard Johnson,
  William Dawson,
  John Hely,
  Robert Mannell,
  Ann Linkon,
  William Besse,
  Mrs. Besse,
  Christopher Saford,
    _uxor_ Saford,
  John Caminge,
  Thomas Palmer,
  Mrs. Palmer,
    _fil_ Palmer,
  Richard English,
  Nathaniel Causey,
  Mrs. Causey,
  Lawrence Evans,
  Edward Clarke,
    _uxor_ Clarke,
    infant Clarke,
  John Gibbs,
  John Davies,          147
  William Emerson,
  Henry Williams,
    _uxor_ Williams,
  Henry Fisher,
    _uxor_ Fisher,
    infant Fisher,
  Thomas Chapman,
    _uxor_ Chapman,
    infant Chapman,
  Edith Hollis,

[T] _Jordan's Jorney._--Hening reports William Popkton as Burgess for
this place. I do not find it on Fry and Jefferson's map, but Jordan's
Point is there, and this is situated a short distance below City Point
and is well known by the same name at the present time.


_Att Flourdieu Hundred._

  Richard Gregory,
  Edward Alborn,
  Thomas Dellimager,
  Thomas Hack,
  Anthony Jones,
  Robert Guy,
  William Strachey,
  John Browne,
  Annis Boult,
  William Baker,
  Theoder Beriston,
  Walter Blake,
  Thomas Watts,
  Thomas Doughty,
  George Deverell,
  Richard Spurling,
  John Woodson,
  William Straimge,
  Thomas Dune,
  John Landman,
  Leonard Yeats,
  George Levet,
  Thomas Harvay,
  Thomas Filenst,
  Robert Smith,
  Thomas Garmder,
  Thomas Gaskon,
  John Olives,
  Christopher Pugett,
  Robert Peake,
  Edward Tramorden,
  Henry Linge,
  Gibert Pepper,
  Thomas Mimes,
  John Linge,
  John Gale,
  Thomas Barnett,
  Roger Thompson,
  Ann Thompson,
  Ann Doughty,
  Sara Woodson,
    Negors,
    Negors,
  6 Negors,
    Negors,
    Negors,
    Negors,
  Grivell, Pooley, Minister,
  Samuel Sharp,
  John Upton,
  John Wilson,
  Henry Rowinge,
  Nathaniell Thomas,
  William Barrett,
  Robert Okley,
  Richard Bradshaw,
  Thomas Sawell,
  John Bramford,
  Anthony, }
  William, }
  John,    }  Negors men.
  Anthony, }
  A Negors Woman.          224


_The rest at West and Sherlow Hundred Island._[U]

  Cap^t Fackt Maddeson,
  Mary Maddeson,
  Thomas Wattson,
  James Wattson,
  Francis West,
  Roger Lewis,
  Richard Domelow,
  William Hatfeild,
  Thomas Fossett,
  Ann Fossett,
  Jenkin Osborne,
  William Sismore,
  Martha Sismore,
  Stephen Braby,
  Elizabeth Braby,
  Edward Temple,
  Daniel Vergo,
  William Tathill, boy,
  Thomas Haile, boy,
  Richard Morewood,
  Edward Sparshott,
  Barnard Jackson,
  William Brocke,
  James Mayro.

[U] _West and Sherlow Hundred Island._--The distinction here made seems
to confirm the suggestion contained in note to West and Sherlow Hundred.


_At Chaplain's Choise._[V]

  Isacke Chaplaine,
  Mrs. Chaplaine,
  John Chaplaine,
  Walter Priest,
  William Weston,
  John Duffy,
  Ann Michaell,
  Thomas Phillipps,
  Henry Thorne,
  Robert Hudson,
  Isacke Baugton,
  Nicholas Sutton,
  William Whitt,
  Edward Butler,
  Henry Turner,
  Thomas Leg,
  John Browne,
  John Trachern,
  Henry Willson,
  Thomas Baldwin,
  Allexander Sanderson,
  David Ellis,
  Sara More,
  Ann, a maid.

[V] _Chaplain's Choise._--This place and Jordan's Journey were
represented in 1629, by Walter Price, according to Hening, and with only
a fair allowance for the orthographical inaccuracies of the time and of
different copyists, it is not impossible that the Walter Priest of the
text is the same person. We can find no clue to its location, but it is
reasonable to suppose it was near Jordan's Point.


_Att James citie and within the Corporation thereof._[W]

  Sir Francis Wyatt, Gov^r
  Margarett, Lady Wyatt,
  Hant Wyatt, minister,
  Kathren Spencer,
  Thomas Hooker,
  John Gather,
  John Matcheman,
  Edward Cooke,
  George Nelson,
  George Hall,
  Lane Burtt,
  Elizabeth Powell,
  Mary Woodward,
  Sir George Yeardley, knight,
  Temperance Lady Yeardley,
  Argall Yeardley,          284
  Frances Yeardley,
  Elizabeth Yeardley,
  Kilibett Hitchcocke,
  Austen Combes,
  John Foster,
  Richard Arrundell,
  Susan Hall,
  Ann Grimes,
  Elizabeth Lyon,
  ---- Younge,
    negro }
    negro } women,
  Alice Davison, _vidua_,
  Edward Sharples,
  Jone Davies,
  George Sands, Treas^r,
  Capt. William Perce,
  Joan Perce,
  Robert Hedges,
  Hugh Win,
  Thomas Moulston,
  Henry Farmer,
  John Lightfoote,
  Thomas Smith,
  Roger Ruese,
  Allexander Gill,
  John Cartwright,
  Robert Austine,
  Edward Bricke,
  William Ravenett,
  Jocomb Andrews,
    _uxor_ Andrews,
  Richard Alder,
  Ester Evere,
  Angelo, a negar,
  Doctor John Pott,
  Elizabeth Pott,
  Richard Townsend,
  Thomas Leister,
  John Kullaway,
  Randall Howlett,
  Jane Dickinson,
  Fortune Taylor,
  Capt. Roger Smith,
  Mrs. Smith,
  Elizabeth Salter,
  Sara Macocke,
  Elizabeth Rolfe,
  Christopher Lawson,
    _uxor_ En. Lawson,
  Francis Fouler,
  Charles Waller,
  Henry Booth,
  Capt. Raph Hamor,
  Mrs. Hamor,
  Joreme Clement,
  Elizabeth Clement,
  Sara Langley,
  Sisely Greene,
  Ann Addams,
  Elkinton Ratclife,
  Francis Gibson,
  James Yemanson,
  John Pountes,
  Christopher Best,
  Thomas Clarke,
  Mr. Reignolds,
  Mr. Hickmore,
    _uxor_ Hickmore,
  Sara Ruddell,
  Edward Blaney,
  Edward Hudson,
    _uxor_ Hudson,
  William Hartley,
  John Shelley,
  Robert Bew,
  William Ward,
  Thomas Mentis,
  Robert Whitmore,
  Robert Channtree,
  Robert Sheppard,
  William Sawyer,
  Lanslott Dansport,
  Mathew Loyd,
  Thomas Ottway,
  Thomas Crouth,
  Elizabeth Starkey,
  Elinor,
  Mrs. Perry,
    infant Perry,
  Frances Chapman,
  George Graues,          376
    _uxor_ Graues,
  Rebecca Snowe,
  Sara Snowe,
  John Isgrane,
  Mary Astombe, _vidua_,
  Benamy Bucke,
  Gercyon Bucke,
  Peleg Bucke,
  Mara Bucke,
  Abram Porter,
  Brigett Clarke,
  Abigall Ascombe,
  John Jackson,
    _uxor_ Jackson,
  Ephraim Jackson,
  Mr. John Burrows,
  Mrs. Burrows,
  Anthony Burrows,
  John Cooke,
  Nicholas Gouldsmith,
  Elias Gaile,
  Andrew Howell,
  Ann Ashley,
  John Southern,
  Thomas Pasmore,
  Andrew Ralye,
  Nathaniel Jefferys,
    _uxor_ Jefferys,
  Thomas Hebbs,
  Clement Dilke,
  Mrs. Dilke,
  John Hinton,
  Richard Stephens,
  Wassell Rayner,
    _uxor_ Rayner,
  John Jackson,
  Edward Price,
  Osten Smith,
  Thomas Spilman,
  Bryan Cawt,
  George Minisy,
  Moyes Ston,
  Capt. Holmes,
  Mr. Calcker,
  Mrs. Calcker,
    infant Calcker,
  Peceable Sherwood,
  Anthony West,
  Henry Barker,
  Henry Scott,
  Margery Dawse,
  Mr. Cann (or Cam)
  Capt. Hartt,
  Edward Spalding,
    _uxor_ Spalding,
    _puer_ Spalding,
    _puella_ Spalding,
  John Helin,
    _uxor_ Helin,
    _puer_ Helin,
    infant Helin,
  Thomas Graye,
    _uxor_ Graye,
  Jone Graye,
  William Graye,
  Richard Younge,
    _uxor_ Younge,
  Jone Younge,
  Rendall Smallwood,
  John Greene,
  William Mudge,
  Mrs. Sothey,
  Ann Sothey,
  Elin Painter,
  Goodman Webb.

[W] _James Citie._--This birthplace of our State, eighty miles below
Richmond, is now the property of a gentleman of New York city, who has
the ground cultivated. During the war the soil was thrown up into
fortifications, and pieces of armor, sword hilts, calthorps, gold,
silver and copper coins were found. All that remains of the city is a
portion of the brick tower which belonged to the church, and which
attracts the attention of travellers on the river with an interest
similar to that of Mount Vernon on the Potomac. Though visited by very
few persons, yet the relic-hunters have removed all of the tombstones,
and have attacked what remains of the church tower.


_In the Maine._

  Richard Atkins,
    _uxor_ Atkins,
  William Baker,
  Edward Oliver,
  Samuell Morris,
  Robert Davis,
  Robert Lunthorne,
  John Vernie,
  Thomas Wood,
  Thomas Rees,          461
  Michael Batt,
    _uxor_ Batt,
    _vidua_ Tindall,
  Mr. Stafferton,
    _uxor_ Stafferton,
  John Fisher,
  John Rose,
  Thomas Thornegood,
  John Badston,
  Susan Blackwood,
  Thomas Rin_s_ton (or f),
  Robert Scottismore,
  Roger Kid,
  Nicholas Bullington,
  Nicholas Marttin,
  John Carter,
  Christopher Hall,
  David Ellis,
    _uxor_ Ellis,
  John Frogmorton,
  Robert Marshall,
  Thomas Snow (orig. Swnow),
  John Smith,
  Lawrance Smalpage,
  Thomas Crosse,
  Thomas Prichard,
  Richard Crouch,
  Christopher Redhead,
  Henry Booth,
  Richard Carven,
    _uxor_ Carven,
  John Howell,
  William Burtt,
  William Stocker,
  Nicholas Roote,
  Sara Kiddall,
    infants { Kiddall,
            { Kiddall,
  Edward Fisher,
  Richard Smith,
  John Wolrich,
  Mrs. Wolrich,
  Johathin Giles,
  Christopher Ripen,
  Thomas Banks,
  Frances Butcher,
  Henry Daivlen,
  Arthur Chandler,
  Richard Sanders,
  Thomas Helcott,
  Thomas Hichcocke,
  Griffine Greene,
  Thomas Osbourn,
  Richard Downes,
  William Laurell,
  Thomas Jordan,
  Edward Busbee,
  Henry Turner,
  Joshua Crew,
  Robert Hutchinson,
  Thomas Jones,
    _uxor_ Jones,
  Reignold Morecocke,
    _uxor_ Morecocke,
  Richard Bridgewatter,
    _uxor_ Bridgewatter,
  Mr. Thomas Bun,
  Mrs. Bun,
  Thomas Smith,
  Elizabeth Hodges,
  William Kemp,
    _uxor_ Kemp,
  Hugh Baldwine,
    _uxor_ Baldwine,
  John Wilmose,
  Thomas Doe,
    _uxor_ Doe,
  George Fryer,
    _uxor_ Fryer,
  Stephen Webb.


_In James Island._

  John Osbourn,
    _uxor_ Osbourn,
  George Pope,
  Robert Cunstable,
  William Jones,
    _uxor_ Jones,          547
  John Johnson,
    _uxor_ Johnson,
    infants { Johnson,
            { Johnson,
  John Hall,
    uxor Hall,
  William Cooksey,
    _uxor_ Cooksey,
    infant Cooksey,
  Alice Kean,
  Robert Fitts,
    _uxor_ Fitts,
  John Reddish,
  John Grevett,
    _uxor_ Grevett,
  John West,
  Thomas West,
  Henry Glover,
  Goodman Stocks,
    _uxor_ Stocks,
    infant Stocks,
  Mr. Adams,
  Mr. Leet,
  William Spence,
    _uxor_ Spence,
    infant Spence,
  James Tooke,
  James Roberts,
  Anthony Harlow,
  Sara Spence,
  George Shurke,
  John Booth & Robt. Bennett.


_The Neck of Land._

  Mr. Kingsmeale,
    _uxor_ Kingsmeale,
    infants { Kingsmeale,
            { Kingsmeale,
  Raph Griphin,
  Frances Compton,
  John Smith,
  John Filmer,
  Edward, a negro,
  Thomas Sulley,
    _uxor_ Sulley,
  Thomas Harwood,
  George Fedam,
  Peter Staber,
  Thomas Popkin,
  Thomas Sides,
  Richard Perse,
    _uxor_ Perse,
  Allen, his man,
  Isabell Pratt,
  Thomas Allnutt,
    _uxor_ Allnutt,
  John Paine,
  Roger Redes,
  Elinor Sprad.

_Over the River._

  John Smith,
    _uxor_ Smith,
    infant Smith,
  John Pergo,
  Richard Fenn,
  William Richardson,
  Robert Lindsey,
  Richard Dolfemb,
  John Bottam,
  John Elliott,
  Susan Barber,
  Thomas Gates,
    _uxor_ Gates,
  Percevall Wood,
  Anthony Burrin,
  William Bedford,
  William Sands,
  John Proctor,
  Mrs. Proctor,
  Phettiplace Close,
  Henry Home,
  Richard Home,          627
  Thomas Flower,
  William Bullocke,
  Ellias Hinton,
  John Foxen,
  Edward Smith,
  John Skimer,
  Martine De Moone,
  William Naile,
  Thomas Fitts,
  Elizabeth Abbitt,
  Alice Fitts.


_At the Plantation over against James Cittie._[X]

  Capt. Samuel Mathews,
  Benjamin Owin,
  Rice Ax^r Williams,
  John, a negro,
  Walter Parnell,
  William Parnell,
  Margaret Roades,
  John West,
  Francis West, _vidua_,
  Thomas Dayhurst,
  Robert Mathews,
  Arthur Gouldsmith,
  Robert Williams,
  Morice Loyd,
  Aron Conway,
  William Sutton,
  Richard Greene,
  Mathew Haman,
  Samuell Davies,
  John Thomas,
  John Docker,
  Abram Wood,
  Michaell Lupworth,
  John Davies,
  Lewis Baly,
  James Daries,
  Alice Holmes,
  Henry Barlow,
  Thomas Button,
  Edmond Whitt,
  Zacharia Crispe,
  John Burland,
  Thomas Hawkins,
  Thomas Phillips,
  Paul Reinolds,
  Nicholas Smith,
  Elizabeth Williams,
  Hugh Cruder,
  Edward Hudson,
  Robert Sheppard,
  Thomas Ottawell,
  Thomas Crouth,
  Robert Bew,
  John Russell,
  Robert Chantry,
  George Rodgers,
  Lanslott Damport,
  John Shule,
  Nathaniell Loyd,
  William Sawyer,
  William Ward,
  William Hartley,
  Jereme Whitt,
  Livetenant Purfrey,
  Edward Grindall,
  Mr. Swift,
  William Hames,
  George Gurr,
  Henry Wood,
  John Baldwine,
  John Needome,
  William Bricks,
  Nicholas Thompson,
  John Dency,
  Erasmus Cartter,
  John Edwards,          704
  George Bayley,
  George Sparke,
  Nicholas Comin,
  Nicholas Arras,
  Marttin Turner,
  John Stone, infant,
  Davy Mansfield,
  John Denmarke,
  Elizabeth Rutten,
  Goodwife Bincks,
  A servant of Mr. Moorewood's.

[X] _At the Plantation over against James Citie._--Hening reports as
Burgesses (after James Citty) for the other side of the water, Capt.
John West, Capt ffelgate; as John West's name appears in the text under
this head, we presume the places are identical and refer to probably
some place on the opposite side of the James river not more definitely
designated.


_The Glase Howse._[Y]

  Vincentio,
  Bernardo,
  Ould Sheppard, his sonn,
  Richard Tarborer.
  Mrs. Bernardo.

[Y] _The Glass House._--We find frequent references to but no notice of
the erection of this building. Smith, in his account of the attempt to
murder him by the Dutchmen in 1608, says, "They sent Francis, their
companion, disguised like a Salvage, to the Glasse-house, a place in the
woods neare a myle from Iames Toune," &c., Smith attempted to apprehend
him, but he escaped, and after he had sent "20 shot after him; himself
returning from the Glasse House alone," when he encountered the king of
the Paspa heigh whom he defeated and "led him prisoner to Iames Toune
and put him in chaynes." Smith (1627) pp. 83, 84.

Stith says after the return of Newport from his expedition of discovery
up James river "No sooner were they landed but the President (Smith)
dispersed as many as were able, some to make Glass and others for
Pitch," &c.; and in 1609, "And now the Colony pursued their business
with alacrity and success. They made three or four lasts of Tar, Pitch,
and Soap ashes and produced a trial of glass," &c., &c. And in 1621,
speaking of the subscriptions opened in England, he says, "The third
roll was for a glass furnace to make beads, which was the current coin
in the Indian trade; and one Captaine Norton, with some Italian workmen,
was sent over for that purpose." See also Stith, pp. 95, 97, 197, 198.
As the names of Vincentio and Benardo appear in the text, we may infer
that some of the Italian workmen survived the massacre of 1622.


_At Archur's Hoop._[Z]

  Lieutenant Harris,
  Rowland Lottis,
    _uxor_ Lottis,
  John Elison,
    _uxor_ Elison,
  George Sanders,
  Thomas Corder,
  Joseph Johnson,
  George Pran,
  John Bottom,
  Thomas Farley,
    _uxor_ Farley,
    a child,
  Nicholas Shotton.

[Z] _Archur's Hoop._--Archer's Hope creek on Fry and Jefferson's map
empties into James river but a short distance below Jamestown, and in
the Particulars of Land in Virginia, referred to in note on page 37,
Archer's Hope is named.


_At Hogg Island._[AA]

  David Sanders, minister,
  John Utie,
  Mrs. Utie,
  John Utie, infant,          738
  William Tyler,
  Elizabeth Tyler,
  Richard Whitby,
  William Ramshaw,
  Rice Watkins,
  Thomas Foskew, lost,
  Hener Elsword,
  Thomas Causey,
  George Union,
  Henry Woodward,
  Roger Webster,
  John Donston,
  Joseph Johnson,
  Richard Crocker, child,
  William Hitchcocke, lost,
  George Prowse,
  Robert Parramore,
  John Jarvice, als. Glover,
  John Browne,
  William Burcher,
  John Burcher,
  John Fulwood,
  Thomas Bransby,
  Thomas Colly,
  Thomas Simpson,
  Thomas Powell,
  Nicholas Longe,

[AA] _Hogg Island._--This is set down on Smith's and all succeeding
maps. It is six or eight miles below Jamestown island, and its name
being unchanged, is very well known at the present time. In the text
John Utie is named as one of the inhabitants, and his name appears in
Hening as one of the Burgesses in 1629 from "the plantations between
Archer's Hope and Martins Hundred," which corresponds with its location.


_At Martin's Hundred._[BB]

  William Harwood,
  Samuell March,
  Hugh Hues,
  John Jackson,
  Thomas Ward,
  John Stevans,
  Humphrey Walden,
  Thomas Doughtie,
  John Hasley,
  Samwell Weaver,
  _vidua_ Jackson,
  _filia_ Jackson,
  Mrs. Taylor,
  Ann Windor,
  Elizabeth Bygrane,
  Mr. Lake,
  Mr. Burren,
  John Stone,
  Samwell Cultey,
  John Helline,
    _uxor_ Helline,
  A Frenchman _et uxor_,
  Thomas Siberg.

[BB] _Martin's Hundred._--Martin's Hundred is located On Fry and
Jefferson's map between Hog island and Mulberry island, and on a small
stream called Skies creek, on the north side of James river. In the
proceedings of the Assembly in 1619 it is referred to as Paspaheigh's,
alias Martin's Hundred, see ante p. 30. In the "Particulars of Land in
Virginia," before mentioned, we read, "Martin's Hundred, containing
80,000 acres, part planted." Captaine Martin was made president by Capt.
John Smith in 1609, but he did not desire the position and resigned. At
the Assembly in 1619, he and the privileges named in his patent, and
certain charges against him of unfair dealing with the Indians occupied
no little attention.--See ante, pp. 12 and 13. For further particulars
in regard to his attempts at imposition on the Company and like charges,
the reader is referred to Stith, pp. 219, 220, 221.


_At Warwick Squrake._[CC]

  John Batt,
  Henry Prinffe,
  Wassell Weblin,
  Anthony Read,
  Frances Woodson,
  Henry Phillips,          794
  Petter Collins,
  Christopher Reinolds,
  Edward Mabin,
  John Maldman,
  Thomas Collins,
  George Rushmore,
  Thomas Spencer,
  George Clarke,
  Richard Bartlett,
  Francis Banks,
  John Jenkins,
  Thomas Jones,
  William Denham,
  Peter,    }
  Anthony,  }
  Frances,  } negroes,
  Margrett, }
  John Bennett,
  Nicholas Skinner,
  John Atkins,
  John Pollentin,
  Rachell Pollentin,
  Margrett Pollentin,
  Mary, a maid,
  Henry Woodward,
  Thomas Sawyer,
  Thomas, a Boye.

[CC] _Warwick Squrake._--It is difficult to decide upon either the
spelling or the pronunciation of this word. On Smith's map it is located
on the south side of James river, and about fifteen or twenty miles
below Jamestown, and is spelt Waraskorack, and on page 59 he spells it
Waraskoyack; Fry and Jefferson locate it on Burwell's bay, and call it
Warnicqueack. Stith calls it Warrasqueake, and gives an interesting
account of "the King of that town," and his hospitable treatment of
Capt. Smith on the night of the 29th of December, 1608: p. 85. In the
"Particulars of Land," McDonald MS. above referred to, it is spelt as
shown in the following extract: "Warosquoiacke Plantation conteyning
downewardes from Hogg island, 14 miles by the ryver side," &c., &c., p.
313.

Hening has it Warrosquoiack, Vol. I., p. 149. In 1634 "the country
divided into eight shires," and this being one of them. Hening there
spells it Warrosquyoake. Vol. I., p. 224.

_At the Indian Thickett._

  Henry Woodall,
  Gregory Dory,
  John Foster,
  John Greene,
  John Ward,
  Christopher Wendmile,
  Richard Rapier,
  Cutbert Pierson,
  Adam Rumell,
  Richard Robinson,
  James, a French man.


_At Elizabeth Cittye._[DD]

  Capt. Isacke Whittakers,
  Mary Whittakers,
  Charles Atkinson,
  Charles Calthrop,
  John Lankfeild,
  Bridges Freeman,
  Nicholas Wesell,
  Edward Loyd,
  Thomas North,
  Anthony Middleton,
  Richard Popely,
  Thomas Harding,
  William Joye,
  Raph Osborne,
  Edward Barnes,
  Thomas Thorugood,
  Ann Atkinson,
  ---- Lankfeild,
  ---- Medclalfe,
  George Nuce,          852
  Elizabeth Whittakers,
  George Roads,
  Edward Jo_s_nson (sic.),
    (qy. Johnson,)
  William Fouller,
  Reinold Goodwyn,
  James Larmount,
  John Jackson,
    _vidua_ Johnson,
    _vidua_ Fowler,
  Two Frenchmen,
  George Medcalfe,
  Walter Ely,
  Thomas Lane,
  Barthelmew Hopkins,
  John Jefferson,
  Robert Thresher,
  John Rowes,
  Mr. Yates,
  Robert Goodman,
    _uxor_ Ely,
    infant Ely,
  Capt. Rawleigh Crashaw,
  Robert Wright,
  James Sleight,
  John Welchman,
  John More,
  Henry Potter,
  Mr. Roswell,
  Mr. Roswell,
  William Gawntlett,
  Osborne Smith,
    _uxor_ More,
    _uxor_ Wright,
    _uxor_ Wright,
    _filia_ Wright,
  Thomas Dowse,
  Samwell Bennett,
  William Browne,
  William Allen,
  Lewis Welchman,
  Robert More,
  Mrs. Dowse,
    _uxor_ Bennett,
    _pueri_ { Bennett,
            { Bennett,

[DD] _Elizabeth Citty._--The settlement which was the foundation of the
county still known by the same name. It includes the peninsula formed by
the Chesapeake bay and James river. At the meeting of the Burgesses in
1629 it was represented as two districts or burroughs, viz; the upper
parte and the lower parte, each having three delegates, and the text
shows that of these Thomas Willobouy of the upper and Adam Thoroughgood
of the lower part were living there in 1626.


_At Bricke Row._[EE]

  Thomas Flint,
  John Hampton,
  Richard Peirsby,
  William Rookins,
  Rowland Williams,
  Steven Dixon,
  Thomas Risby,
  Henry Wheeler,
  James Brooks,
  Samuel Bennett,
  John Carning,
  Thomas Neares,
  Robert Salvadge,
  William Barry,
  Joseph Hatfield,
  Edward Marshall,
  Ambrose Griffith,
  Petter Arrundell,
  Anthony Bonall, }
  ---- La Geurd,  } Frenchmen,
  James Bonall, a Frenchm.,
  John Arrundell,
  John Haine,
  Nicholas Row,
  Richard Althrop,
  John Loyd
    _uxor_ Haine (or Hame),
    _uxor_ Hampton,
  Elizabeth Arrundell,
  Margret Arrundell,          927

[EE] _Bricke Row._--We can find no reference to this place unless "The
Row" on the north side of the James a short distance above the mouth of
the Chichahominy, on Fry and Jefferson's map is the place.

_At Bass's Choice._

  Capt. Nathaniel Basse,
  Samwell Basse,
  Benjamin Simmes,
  Thomas Sheward,
  Benjamin Handcleare,
  William Barnard,
  John Shelley,
  Nathaniell Moper,
  Nath. Gammon,
  Margrett Giles,
  Richard Longe,
    _uxor_ Longe,
    infant Longe,
  Richard Evans.
  William Newman,
  John Army,
  Peter Langden,
  Henry,
  Andrew Rawley,
  Peter.


_More at Elizabeth Cittie._

  Lieutenant Sheppard,
  John Powell,
  John Wooley,
  Cathren Powell,
  John Bradston,
  Francis Pitts,
  Gilbert Whitfield,
  Peter Hereford,
  Thomas Faulkner,
  Esaw de la Ware,
  William Cornie,
  Thomas Curtise,
  Robert Brittaine,
  Roger Walker,
  Henry Kersly,
  Edward Morgaine,
  Anthony Ebsworth,
  Agnes Ebsworth,
  Elinor Harris,
  Thomas Addison,
  William Longe,
  William Smith,
  William Pinsen,
  Capt. William Tucker,
  Capt. Nick Martean,
  Leftenant Ed. Barkly,
  Daniell Tanner,
  John Morris,
  George Thomson,
  Paule Thomson,
  William Thomson,
  Pasta Champin,
  Stephen Shere,
  Jeffery Hall
  Rich. Jones,
  William Hutchinson,
  Richard Apleton,
  Thomas Evans,
  Weston Browne,
  Robert Mounday,
  Steven Colloe,
  Ralph Adams,
  Thomas Phillips,
  Francis Barrett,
  Mary Tucker,
  Jane Brackley,
  Elizabeth Higgins,
  Mary Mounday,
  Chouponke, an Indian,
  Anthony,  }
  Isabella, } negroes.
  Lieut. Lupo,
  Phillip Lupo,
  Bartholmew Wethersby,
  Henry Draper,
  Joseph Haman,
  Elizabeth Lupo,
  Albiano Wethersby,
  John Laydon,
  Ann Laydon,
  Virginia Laydon,
  Alice Laydon,          1009
  Katherine Laydon,
  William Evans,
  William Julian,
  William Kemp,
  Richard Wither,
  John Jornall,
  Walter Mason,
  Sara Julian,
  Sara Gouldocke,
  John Salter,
  William Soale,
  Jeremy Dickenson,
  Lawrance Peele,
  John Evans,
  Marke Evans,
  George Evans,
  John Downeman,
  Elizabeth Downeman,
  William Baldwin,
  John Sibley,
  William Clarke,
  Rice Griffine,
  Joseph Mosley,
  Robert Smith,
  John Cheesman,
  Thomas Cheesman,
  Edward Cheesman,
  Peter Dickson,
  John Baynam,
  Robert Sweet,
  John Parrett,
  William Fouks,
  John Clackson,
  John Hill,
  William Morten,
  William Clarke,
  Edward Stockdell,
  Elizabeth Baynam,
  George Davies,
  Elizabeth Davies,
  Ann Harrison,
  John Curtise,
  John Walton,
  Edward Oston,
  Toby Hurt,
  Cornelius May,
  Elizabeth May,
  Henry May, child,
  Thomas Willowbey,
  Oliver Jenkinson,
  John Chandeler,
  Nicholas Davies,
  Jone Jenkins,
  Mary Jenkins,
  Henry Gouldwell,
  Henry Prichard,
  Henry Barber,
  Ann Barber,
  John Hutton,
  Elizabeth Hutton,
  Thomas Baldwin,
  John Billiard,
  Reynold Booth,
  Mary,
  Elizabeth Booth, child,
  Capt. Thomas Davies,
  John Davies,
  Thomas Huges,
  William Kildrige,
  Alex^r Mountney,
  Edward Bryan,
  Percivall Ibotson,
  John Penrice,
  Robert Locke,
  Elizabeth & Ann Ibotson,
  Edward Hill,
  Thomas Best,
  Hanna Hill,
  Elizabeth Hill,
  Robert Salford,
  John Salford,
  Phillip Chapman,
  Thomas Parter,
  Mary Salford,
  Francis Chamberlln,
  William Hill,
  William Harris,
  William Worldige,
  John Forth,
  Thomas Spilman,
  Rebecca Chamberlin,
  Alice Harris,          1102
  Pharow Phlinton,
  Arthur Smith,
  Hugh Hall,
  Robert Sabin,
  John Cooker,
  Hugh Dicken,
  William Gayne,
  Richard Mintren, Jun^r,
  Joane Hinton,
  Elizabeth Hinton,
  Rebecca Coubber,
  Richard Mintren, Sen^r,
  John Frye,
  William Brooks,
  Sibile and William Brooks,
  Thomas Crispe,
  Richard Packe,
  Miles Prichett,
  Thomas Godby,
  Margery Prichett,
  Jone Goodby,
  Jone Grindry,
  John Iniman,
  Mary Grindry,
  John Grindry, child,
  John Waine,
  Ann Waine,
  Mary Ackland,
  George Ackland,
  John Harlow,
  William Cappe,
  Edward Walters,
  Paule Harwood,
  Nick. Browne,
  Adam Througood,
  Richard East,
  Stephen Read,
  Grace Watters,
  Will^m Watters.
  Will^m Ganey,
  Henry Ganey,
  John Robinson,
  Robert Browne,
  Thomas Parrish,
  Edmund Spalden,
  Roger Farbracke,
  Theodor Jones,
  William Baldwin,
  Luke Aden,
  Anna Ganey,
  Anna Ganey, _filia_,
  Elizabeth Pope,
  Rebecca Hatch,
  Thomasin Loxmore,
  Thomas Garnett,
  Elizabeth Garnett,
  Susan Garnett,
  Frances Michell,
  Jonas Stockton,
  Timothee Stockton,
  William Cooke,
  Richard Boulten,
  Frances Hill,
  John Jackson,
  Richard Davies,
  Ann Cooke,
  Dictras Chrismus,
  Thomas Hill,
  Arthur Davies,
  William Newcome,
  Elizabeth Chrismus,
  Joan Davies,
  Thomas Hethersall,
  William Douglas,
  Thomas Douthorn,
  Elizabeth Douthorn,
  Samuel Douthorn, a boy,
  Thomas, an Indian,
  John Hazard,
  Jone Hazard,
  Henry,
  Frances Mason,
  Michaell Wilcocks,
  William Querke,
  Mary Mason,
  Mandlin Wilcocks,
  Mr. Keth, minister,
  John Bush,
  John Cooper,
  Jonadab Illett,
  John Barnaby,
  John Seaward,          1195
  Robest Newman,
  William Parker,
  Thomas Snapp,
  Clement Evans,
  Thomas Spilman,
  Thomas Parrish.


_At the Eastern Shore._

  Capt. William Epps,
  Mrs. Epps,
  Peter Epps,
  William,
  Edmond Cloake,
  William Bribby,
  Thomas Cornish,
  John Fisher,
  William Dry,
  Henry Wilson,
  Peter Porter,
  Christopher Cartter,
  John Sunnfill (or Sumfill),
  Nicholal Graunger,
  James Vocat Piper,
  Edward,
  John,
  Thomas,
  George,
  Charles Farmer,
  James Knott,
  John Ascomb,
  Robert Fennell,
  Phillip,
  Daniell Cogley,
  William Andrews,
  Thomas Granes,
  John Wilcocks,
  Thomas Crampe,
  William Coomes,
  John Parsons,
  John Coomes,
  James Chambers,
  Robert Ball,
  Goodwife Ball,
  Thomas Hall,
  Ismale Hills,
  John Tyers,
  Walter Scott,
  Goodwife Scott,
  Robert Edmonds,
  Thomas Hichcocke,
  John Evans,
  Henry Wattkins,
  Peregree Wattkins,
  Daniell Watkins,
  John Blower,
  Gody Blower,
  John,
  A boy of Mr. Cans,
  John How,
  John Butterfeild,
  William Davies,
  Peter Longman,
  John Wilkins,
  Goodwife Wilkins,
  Thomas Powell,
  Gody Powell,
  Thomas Parke,
  William Smith,
  Edward Drew,
  Nicholas Hoskins,
    and his child,
  William Williams,
  Mrs. Williams,
  John Throgmorton,
  Bennanine Knight,
  Chad Gunston,
  Abram Analin,
  Thomas Blacklocke,
  John Barnett,
  Thomas Savadge,
  William Beane,
  Salamon Greene,
  John Wasborne,
  William Quills.          1277

_The End of the List of the Living._




A LIST OF THE NAMES OF THE DEAD IN VIRGINIA
SINCE APRIL LAST.

FEB^y 16^{th}, 1623.


_Colledge._

  William Lambert,
  John Wood,     }
  William More,  } killed,
  Thomas Naylor, }
  James Howell.  }


_At the Neck of Land._

  Moses Conyers,
  George Grimes,
  William Clements,
  Thomas Fernley, killed,
  Edward.


_At Jordain's Jorney._

  Roger Much,
  Mary Reese,
  Robert Winter,
  Robert Woods,
  Richard Shriese,
  Thomas Bull,
  John Kinton,
  Daniell.


_At West & Sherlow Hundred._

  Samwell Foreman,
  Zorobabell,
  2 Indians,
  One negar,
  Thomas Roberts,
  John Edmonds,
  John Lasey,
  Daniell Francke,
  Capt. Nath. West,
  Christopher Harding, killed.


_At Flower de Hundred._

  John Mayor,
  William Waycome,
  Thomas Prise,
  Robert Walkin,
  John Fetherston,
  John Ax. Roberts,
  Richard Jones,
  Richard Griffin,
  Richard Ranke,
  William Edger,          39
  John Fry,
  Dixi Carpenter,
  William Smith,
  James Cindnare,
  Edward Temple,
  Sara Salford,
  John Stanton,
  Christo. Evans.


_At James Cittie._

  Mr. Sothey,
  John Dumpont,
  Thomas Browne,
  Henry Sothey,
  Thomas Sothey,
  Mary Sothey,
  Elizabeth Sothey,
  Thomas Clarke,
  Margarett Shrawley,
  Richard Walker,
  Vallentyne Gentler,
  Peter Brishitt,
  Humphrey Boyse,
  John Watton,
  Arthur Edwards,
  Thomas Fisher,
  William Spence, }
  Mrs. Spence,    } lost,
  George Sharks,
  John Bush,
  Mr. Collins,
    _uxor_ Collins,
  Mr. Peyden,
  Peter De Maine,
  Goodman Ascomb,
  Goodman Witts,
  William Kerton,
  Mr. Atkins,
  Thomas Hakes,
  Peter Gould,
  Robert Ruffe,
  Ambrose Fresey,
  Henry Fry,
  John Dinse,
  Thomas Trundall,
  Richard Knight,
  John Jefferys,
  John Hamun,
  John Meridien,
  John Countivane,
  Thomas Guine,
  Thomas Somersall,
  William Rowsley,
  Elizabeth Rowsley,
    a maid of theirs,
  Robert Bennett,
  Thomas Roper,
  Mr. Fitziefferys,
  Mrs. Smith,
  Peter Martin,
  James Jakins,
  Mr. Crapplace,
  John Lullett,
  Ann Dixon,
  William Hewlett,
  Mr. Furlow's child,
  Jacob Prophett,
  John Reding (or Reeing)
  Ritchard Atkins,
    his child,
  John Bayly,
  William Jones, his son and,
  John, Mr. Pearis' servant,
  Josias Hartt,
  Judith Sharp,
  Ann Quarle,
  ---- Reignolds,
  William Dier,
  Mary Dier,
  Thomas Sexton,
  Mary Brawdrye,
  Edward Normansell,
  Henry Fell,
  ---- Enims,
  Roger Turnor,
  Thomas Guine,
  John Countway,
  John Meriday,          125
  Benjamine Usher,
  John Haman,
  John Jefferyes,
  Richard Knight,
  John Walker,
  Hosier,
  William Jackson,
  William Apleby,
  John Manby,
  Arthur Cooke,
  Stephen.


_At the Plantation over ag^t James Cittie._

  Humphrey Clough,
  Morris Chaloner,
  Samuell Betton,
  John Gruffin,
  William Edwards,
  Wiliam Salisbury,
  Mathew Griffine,
  Robert Adwards,
  John Jones,
  Thomas Prichard,
  Thomas Morgaine,
  Thomas Biggs,
  Nicholas Bushell,
  Robert Williams,
  Robert Reynolds,
  Edward Huies,
  Thomas Foulke,
  Mathew Jenings,
  Richard Morris,
  Frances Barke,
  John Ewins,
  Samwell Fisher,
  John Ewins,
  James Cartter,
  Edward Fletcher,
  Aderton Greene,
  Morice Baker,
  Robert, Mr. Ewins' man,
  Robert Pidgion,
  Thomas Triggs,
  James Thursby,
  Nicholas Thimbleby,
  Frances Millett,
  John Hooks,
  Thomas Lawson,
  William Miller,
  Nicholas Fatrice,
  John Champ,
  John Maning,
  Richard Edmonds,
  David Collins,
  Thomas Guine,
  John Vicars,
  John Meredie,
  Beng. Usher,
  John Cantwell,
  Richard Knight,
  Robert Hellue,
  Thomas Barrow,
  John Enines,
  Edward Price,
  Robert Taylor,
  Richard Butterey,
  Mary Lacon,
  Robert Baines,
  Joseph Arther,
  Thomas Mason,
  John Beman,
  Christo. Pittman,
  Thomas Willer,
  Samwell Fulshaw,
  John Walmsley,
  Abram Colman,
  John Hodges,
  Naamy Boyle.


_At Hogg Island._

  William Brakley,
  Peter Dun,
  John Long.          204

_At Martins Hundred._

  Henry Bagford,
  Nicholas Gleadston,
  Nicholas Dornigton,
  Raph Rogers,
  Richard Frethram,
  John Brogden,
  John Beanam,
  Francis Atkinson,
  Robert Atkinson,
  John Kerill,
  Edward Davies,
  Percivall Mann,
  Mathew Staneling,
  Thomas Nicholls,
  2 children of the Frenchmen,
  John Pattison,     }
    _uxor_ Pattison, }   killed,
  Edward Windor,
  Thomas Horner,
  John Walker,
  Thomas Pope,
  Richard Ston,
  John Catesby,
  Richard Stephens,
  William Harris,
  Christo. Woodward,
  Joseph Turner.


_At Warwick Squrake._

Josias Collins, Clement Wilson, William Robinson, Christo. Rawson,
Thomas Winslow, _uxor_ Winslow, infant Winslow, Alex^r Sussames, Thomas
Prickett, Thomas Maddox, John Greene, Nathaniel Stanbridg, John Litton,
Christo. Ash, _uxor_ Ash, infant Ash, Nethaniel Lawe,} Jane Fisher,}
killed, Phillip Jones, Edward Banks, John Symons, Thomas Smith, Thomas
Griffin, George Cane, Robert Whitt, Symon, an Italien. X/


_At Elizabeth Cittie._

  Charle Marshall,
  William Hopkicke,
  Dorothie Parkinson,
  William Robertts,
  John Farrar,
  Martin Cuffe,
  Thomas Hall,
  Thomas Smith,
  Christo. Robertts,
  Thomas Browne,
  Henry Fearne,
  Thomas Parkins,
  Mr. Hussy,
  James Collis,
  Raph Rockley,
  William Geales,
  George Jones,
  Andrew Allinson,
  William Downes,
  Richard Gillett,
  Goodwife Nonn,
  Hugo Smale,          280
  Thomas Wintersall,
  John Wright,
  James Fenton,
  Cisely, a maid,
  John Gavett,
  James, }
  John,  } Irishmen,
  Jocky Armestronge,
  Wolston Pelsant,
  Sampson Pelsant,
  Cathrin Capps,
  William Elbridg,
  John Sanderson,
  John Bewbricke,
  John Baker, killed,
  William Lupo,
  Timothy Burley,
  Margery Frisle,
  Henry West,
  Jasper Taylor,
  Brigett Searle,
  Anthony Andrew,
  Edmond Cartter,
  Thomas ----,
  William Gauntlett,
  Gilbert ----, killed,
  Christopher Welchman,
  John Hilliard,
  Gregory Hilliard,
  John Hilliard,
  William Richards,
  Elizabeth, a maid,
  Capt. Hickcocke,
  Thomas Keinnston,
  Capt. Lincolne,
  Chad. Gulstons,
    _uxor_ Gulstons,
    infant Gulstons,
  George Cooke,
  Richard Goodchild,
  Chrisenus, his child,
  Elizabeth Mason,
  Symon Wither,
  Whitney Guy,
  Thomas Brodbanke,
  William Burnhouse,
  John Sparkes,
  Robert Morgaine,
  John Locke,
  William Thompson,
  Thomas Fulham,
  Cutberd Brooks,
  Innocent Poore,
  Edward Dupper,
  Elizabeth Davies,
  Thomas Buwen,
  Ann Barber,
  William Lucott,
  Nicholas ----, killed,
  Henry Bridges,
  Henry Payton,
  Richard Griffin,
  Raph Harrison,
  Samwell Harvie,
  John Boxer,
  Benjaimine Boxer,
  Thomas Servant,
  Frances Chamberline,
  Bridgett Dameron,
  Isarell Knowles,
  Edward Bendige,
  William Davies,
  John Phillips,
  Daniell Sandwell,
  William Jones,
  Robert Ball's wife,
  Robert Leaner,
  Hugh Nickcott,
  John Knight.


_Out of the Ship called The Furtherance._

  John Walker,
  ---- Hosier,
  William Jackson,
  William Apleby,
  John Manby,
  Arthur Cooke,
  Steven.          366

_Out of the God's Gift._

  Mr. Clare, master,
  William Bennett.


_Out of the Margrett & John._

  Mr. Langley,
  Mr. Wright.


  The Guner of the _William & John_.   371

_FINIS._




_EDITOR'S NOTE._


The reader will perceive that the foregoing list of the dead reports
only those who had died "since April last" (1622), consequently does not
include the victims of the Indian massacre, which occurred on the 22d of
March of that year. The number which fell by that diabolical conspiracy,
as reported by Smith, amounted to 347, and in his Generall Historie, at
page 149, he has a list of the numbers murdered at different places.
Neill copies from the Records of the Virginia Company (now in the
Congressional Library at Washington) a list of their names--see his
"History of the Virginia Company," pp. 339-346--and considering that it
is proper to annex this to the list preceding we herewith give it. The
total corresponds with the statement in Smith's Historie.

The number of deaths in the census list shows a mortality amounting in
one year to upwards of twenty per cent. of the whole population,
exceeding the number which fell in the massacre by twenty-four. The
fullest details of this and many other matters relating to the Colony
while under the Virginia Company, can be found more fully shown in
Neill's History of the Virginia Company than in any other work we have
seen.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Here following is set downe a true list of the names of all those that
were massacred by the treachery of the Sauages in Virginia, the 22^{nd}
March last.

"To the end that their lawfull heyres may take speedy order for the
inheritinge of their lands and estates there. For which the honourable
Company of Virginia are ready to do them all right and fauour:"


_At Captaine Berckley's Plantation, seated at Falling Creeke, some 66
miles from James Citie, in Virginia._

  John Berkley, Esquire,
  Thomas Brasington,
  John Sawyer,
  Roger Dauid,
  Francis Gowsh,
  Bartholmew Peram,
  Giles Peram,
  John Dowler,
  Laurence Dowler,
  Lewis Williams,
  Richard Bascough,
  Thomas Holland,
  John Hunt,
  Robert Horner Mason,
  Phillip Bames,
  William Swandal,
  Robert Williams, his Wife and Childe,
  Giles Bradshawe, his Wife and Childe,
  John Howlet and his sonne,
  Thomas Wood and Collins his man,
  Joseph Fitch, apothecary to Doctor Pots.

_At Master Thomas Sheffield Plantation, some three miles from the
Falling Creeke._

  Master Th: Sheffield[478] and Rachel his wife,
  John Reeue,
  William Tyler, a boy,
  Samuel Reeue,
  John Ellen,
  Robert Tyler, a boy,
  Mathew ----,
  Judeth Howard,
  Thomas Poole,
  Methusalem ----,
  Thomas Taylor,
  William Tyler

[478] The son of William Sheffield.


_At Henrico Iland, about two miles from Sheffield's Plantation._

  ---- Atkins,
  ---- Weston,
  Philip Shatford,
  William Perigo,
  Owen Jones, one of Capt. Berkley's people.


_Slaine of the Colledge People, about two miles from Henrico-Citie._

  Samuel Stringer,
  George Soldan,
  William Basset,
  John Perry,
  Edward Ember,
  Jarrat Moore,
  Thomas Xerles,
  Thomas Freeman,
  John Allen,
  Thomas Cooke,
  John Clements,
  James Faulkoner,
  Christopher Henley,
  William Jordan,
  Robert Dauis,
  Thomas Hobson,
  William Bailey.


_At Apo-mattucke River, at Master Abraham Pierce his Plantation, some
five miles off the Colledge People._

  William Charte,
  Jo: Waterhowse,
  John Barker, a boy,
  Robert Yeoman.


_At Charles-Citie and about the precincts of Capt. Smith's Company._

  Roger Royal,
  Thomas Jones,
  Robert Maruel,
  Edward Heydon,
  Henry Bushel.


_At other Plantations next adioyning._

  Richard Plat and his Brother,
  Henry Milward, his wife, his Childe and his Sister,
  Richard, a boy,
  Goodwife Redhead.


_At Mr. William Farrar's House._

  Master John England and his man,
  John Bel,
  Henricke Peterson and Alice, his Wife, and William, her sonne,
  Thomas, his man,
  James Woodshaw,
  Mary and   }
  Elizabeth, } Maid servants.

_At Berkley-Hundred, some five miles from Charles-Citie._

  Capt. George Sharpe, Esq., one of his Maiesties Petitioners.
  John Rowles,
  Richard Rowles, his Wife and Childe,
  Giles Wilkins,
  Giles Bradway,
  Richard Fereby,
  Thomas Sharpe,
  Robert Jordan,
  Edward Painter.

_At Westouer, about a mile from Berkley-Hundred._

And First at Cap. Fr. West's Plantation:

  James English,
  Richard Dash.

At Master John West's Plantation:

  Christopher Turner,
  Dauid Owen.

At Capt. Nathanael Wests:

  Michael Aleworth,
  John Wright.

At Lieutenant Gibs his Dividend:

  John Paly,
  Thomas Ratcliffe,
  Michael Booker,
  John Higglet,
  Nathanael Earle,
  John Gibbes,
  William Parker,
  Richard Wainham,
  Benomy Keyman,
  Thomas Gay,
  James Vpfall,
  Daniel, M^r Dombelowes man.

At Mr. Richard Owen's House:

  Richard Owen,
  Stephen Dubo,
  Francis, an Irishman,
  Thomas Paine,
  One old Maid called blinde Margaret,
  William Reeue.

At Master Owen Macar's House:

  Owen Macar,
  Garret Farrel,
  Richard Yeaw,
  One Boy.

At Master Macock's Dividen:

  Capt. Samuel Macock, Esquire,
  Edward Lister,
  Thomas Browne,
  John Downes.


_At Flowerdieu-Hundred, Sir George Yeardley's Plantation._

  John Philips,
  Thomas Nuson,
  John Braford,
  Robert Taylor,
  Samuel Jarret,
  Elizabeth Bennet.

_At the other side of the River, opposite to Flowerdieu-Hundred._

  Master Hobson and his wife,
  Richard Storks,
  John Slaughter,
  Thomas Philips,
  Richard Campion,
  Anne Greene.


_At Mr. Swinhowe his House._

  Mistris Swinhow and Thomas and George Swinhow, her sonnes,
  Richard Mosse,
  John Larkin,
  William Blyth,
  Thomas Grindal.


_At Mr. William Bikar's House._

  William Bykar,
  Math. Hawthorn and his wife,
  Edward Pierce,
  Nicholas Howsdon.


_At Weynoack of Sir George Yeardley his people._

  Nathaniel Elie,
  John Flores,
  Henry Gape,
  ---- Buckingham,
  William Puffet,
  William Walker,
  John Gray,
  James Boate,
  John Suersby,
  Thomas Euans,
  Thomas ap-Richard,
  Henry Haynes,
  John Blewet,
  Henry Rice,
  ---- Hurt,
  Jonas Alpart,
  Thomas Stephens,
  Samuel Goodwine,
  John Snow and his Boy,
  Margery Blewet.


_At Powle-Brooke._

  Capt. Nath. Powle, Esq., and his wife, Daughter to M^r Tracey,
  Mistris Bray,
  Adam Rayner's wife,
  Barbara Burges,
  William Head,
  Thomas Woolcher,
  William Meakins,
  Robert ----,
  Peter Jordan,
  Nathanael Leydon,
  Peter Goodale.


_At Southampton Hundred._

  Robert Goffe and his wife,
  William Larkum,
  John Dauis,
  William Mountsort.

_At Martin Brandons._

  Lieutenant Sanders,
  Ensigne Sherley,
  John Taylor and his wife,
  2 Boyes,
  Mathew, a Polander.

_At Captaine Spilman's House._

  John Basingthwayte,
  Walter Shawe.


_At Ensigne Spence his House._

  William Richmond,
  John Fowler,
  Alexander Bale,
  William Fierfax,
  The Tinker.


_Persons slaine at Martins-Hundred, some seaven miles from James-Citie._

  Lieutenant Rich: Kean,
  Master Tho: Boise &
    Mistris Boise, his wife &
    a sucking Childe,
    4 of his men,
    A Maide,
    2 Children,
  Nathanael Jefferies wife,
  Margaret Dauies,
  3 seruants,
  Master John Boise,
    his wife,
    A Maide,
    4 Men-seruants,
  Laurence Wats,
    his Wife,
    2 Men seruants,
  Timothy Moise,
    his Man,
  Henry Bromage,
    his Wife,
    his Daughter,
    his Man,
  Edward How,
    his Wife,
    his Childe,
  A child of John Jackson,
  4 Men seruants,
  Josua Dary,
    his wife,
  Richard Staples,
    his wife,
    and Childe,
  2 Maides,
  6 Men and Boyes,
  Walter Dauies &
    his brother,
  Christopher Guillam,
  Thomas Combar,
    A Man,
  Ralphe Digginson,
    his Wife,
  Richard Cholser,
  George Jones,
  Cisby Cooke,
    his wife,
  Dauid Bons,
  John Benner,
  John Mason,
  William Pawmet,
  Thomas Bats,
  Peter Lighborrow,
  James Thorley,
  Robert Walden,
  Thomas Tolling,
  John Butler,
  Edward Rogers,
  Maximilian Russel,
  Henry, a Welchman.


_At Mr. Thomas Pierce his House over against Mulberry Iland._

  Master Tho: Pierce,
    his Wife,
    and Childe,
  John Hopkins,
  John Samon,
  A French Boy.


_At Mr. Edward Bennets Plantation._

  Mastter Th: Brewood,
    his wife,
    his Childe,
  Robert Gray,
  John Griffin,
  Ensigne Harrison,
  John Costard,
  Dauid Barry,
  Thomas Sheppard,
  Henry Price,
  Robert ----,
  Edward Jolby,
  Richard ----,
  Alice Jones,
  Thomas Cooke,
  Philip Worth,
  Mathew a maid,
  Francis Winder,
  Thomas Conly,
  Richard Woodward,
  Humfrey Cropen,
  Thomas Bacon,
  Euan Watkins,
  Richard Lewis,
  Edward Towse,
  2 Seruants,
  Thomas Ferris,
  George Cole,
  Remember Michel,
  ---- Bullocke,
  Richard Chandler,
  Henry Moore,
  Nicholas Hunt,
  John Corderoy,
  Richard Cockwell,
  John Howard,
  Mistris Harrison,
  Mary Dawks,
  Annie English,
  Rebecca ----,
  Master Prowse,
  Hugh ----,
  John ----,
  Edward ----,
  Mistris Chamberlin,
  Parnel a maid,
  Humfrey Sherbrooke,
  John Wilkins,
  John Burton.

  John Scotchmore, } M^r John Pontis his men.
  Edward Turner,   }

  Edward Brewster, Lieutenant Pierce his man.

  Thomas Holland, Capt. Whittakers man.


_At Master Walters his house._

  Master Edward Walters,
    his wife,
    a Childe,
    a Maid,
    a Boy.

The whole number 347.




A BRIEFE DECLARATION
OF THE
PLANTATION OF VIRGINIA

DURINGE THE FIRST TWELVE YEARES, WHEN
SIR THOMAS SMITH WAS GOVERNOR OF
THE COMPANIE, & DOWNE TO THIS
PRESENT TYME.

BY THE

ANCIENT PLANTERS NOWE REMAINING ALIVE IN VIRGINIA.

1624.




PREFACE.


The next paper presented in this collection is a copy of the one from
which Mr. Bancroft quotes in his introductory note to the meeting of the
first Assembly, referring to it as "MS. in my possession." This is
printed from the copy among the McDonald papers, and with its title and
endorsements no intimation is given as to the date of its preparation,
its author or authors, to whom it was addressed, or the use intended to
be made of it. These questions are, however, answered almost entirely by
reference to the entries in "Sainsbury's Calendar of State Papers,"
which, on pp. 65-'6, has the following: "1624. July. Petition of Gov.
Sir Francis Wyatt, the Council and Assembly of Virginia to the King.
Have understood that his Majesty, notwithstanding the unjust
disparagement of the Plantation, has taken it under his especial care;
intreat that credit may not be given to the late declarations presented
to his Majesty concerning the happy, but indeed miserable, estate of the
Colony during the first twelve years (of Sir Thos. Smith's government),
nor to the malicious imputations which have been laid upon the late
government. Inclose the true state of both, and earnestly request that
the present government may be continued. Pray that the King's tender
compassion will not allow them to fall into the hands of Sir Thos. Smith
or his confidents." Signed by Sir Fran. Wyatt, Capt. Fan. West, Sir
George Yeardley and eighty-six others. _Inclose._--"Brief Declaration of
the Plantation," &c., giving the whole title of this paper, verbatim,
and a copious abstract of its contents. The earliest account of the
horrors it relates is to be found in Smith's History, p. 105, in what is
called "the examinations of Doctor Simons." This writer gives full
details of the straits to which the Colonists were reduced and the
expedients to which they resorted to appease hunger in 1609; adding,
after the statements in regard to eating the Indian who had been buried
several days and their eating "one another boyled, and stewed with
rootes and herbes," the account of the man who "did kill his wife,
powdered her, and had eaten part of her before it was known," and adding
with a grim humour, "now whether shee was better roasted, boyled or
carbonado'd, I know not, but of such a dish as powdered wife, I never
heard of." His statements are copied, with more or less variation, by
Beverley, Stith, Keith and Burke, but not one of them go into the
disgusting and improbable details named in the "Brief Declaration."
Campbell also reports the stories, but adds, in regard to the wife
murderer, "upon his trial it appeared that cannibalism was feigned to
palliate the murder," p. 93. Neill quotes from the Records of the
Virginia Company, "The Tragical Relation of Virginia Assembly," which
was transmitted to England about 1621; this was intended as a reply to a
petition of Alderman Johnson and others, who had represented to the King
that the reports in regard to Sir Thos. Smith's management were false,
and desiring an investigation. These petitioners were members of a
faction which desired to break up the Virginia Company. In the Relation
of the Assembly, Smith is charged with all the cruelties to the
Colonists which are mentioned in this "Brief Declaration"; torturing
and starving to death being the punishments for minor offences; and
asserting their confidence in the truth of these statements by
concluding it with these words: "And rather to be reduced to live under
the like government we desire his Ma^{ties} commissioners may be sent
over w^{th} authoritie to hange us." This is signed by thirty members of
the General Assembly, including among the names, those of George Sandys,
the poet, traveller and Secretary of the Colony, and Raph Hamor, the
chronicler--See Neill, pp. 407-411.

There is another reference to this starving time (as it is called) and
its accompanying horror, which should not be allowed to pass without
notice. As above stated, the worst state of affairs was reported to have
existed in 1609, and in the next year a pamphlet with the following
title was issued, "A true declaration of the estate of the Colonie of
Virginia, with a refutation of such scandalous reports as haue tended to
the disgrace of so worthy an enterprise. Published by aduise and
direction of the Councell of Virginia. London, 1610." The writer of
which, after referring to the slanders which had been circulated in
regard to Sir Thos. Smith's government, and especially of the story of
the wife-eater, says, "Sir Thomas Gates thus relateth the tragedie," and
then follows a long passage to the effect that "one of the companie
mortally hated his wife," and having killed her and secreted her body
after cutting it into peices; when it was found out he said she died and
he had hid her to satiafie his hunger, and had fed daily upon her, but
upon searching his house they found a large quantity of provisions.--See
Force's tracts, Vol. III. The writers of the "Brief Declaration," and
the "True Declaration," must have seen this statement published ten or
twelve years before they wrote, and it is a little remarkable that they
should have persisted in repeating a story which was far from being well
authentitcated, especially as the true statement did not need this
addition to increase the odium incurred by the mismanagement of Sir
Thos. Smith, the evidences of which are herein set forth.

Stith reports the stories of the Indian "that had been slain and buried"
being taken up and eaten, and "so did several others, one another that
died," and also that of the man who "killed his wife and powdered her
up, and eat the greater portion before it was discovered;" and adds, for
many years after it was "remembered by the name of the _starving time_,"
p. 116-117. For many particulars nowhere else given, see Neill's
History, pp. 407-411.




STATE PAPER OFFICE.    }
COLONIAL.              }
_Volume 3, No. 21, I._ }


     A BREIFE DECLARATION _of the Plantation of Virginia duringe the
     first Twelve Yeares, when Sir Thomas Smith was Governor of the
     Companie, & downe to this present tyme. By the Ancient Planters
     nowe remaining alive in Virginia._

Wheras in the beginninge of Sir Thomas Smith's twelve yeares government,
it was published in printe throughout the Kingdome of Englande that a
Plantation should be settled in Virginia for the glorie of God in the
propogation of the Gospell of Christ, the conversion of the Savages, to
the honour of his Majesty, by the enlargeinge of his territories and
future enrichinge of his kingdome, for which respects many noble & well
minded persons were induced to adventure great sums of money to the
advancement of soe pious & noble a worke, who have from the very first
been frustrate of their expectation, as wee conceive, by the
misgovernment of Sir Thomas Smith, aiminge at nothinge more then a
perticular gaine, to be raised out of the labours of such as both
voluntarilie adventured themselves and were otherwise sent over at the
common charge. This will cleerely appeare in the examination of the
first expedition & severall supplies in the tyme of his government.

The first Plantation in Virginia consisted of one hundred persons, so
slenderly provided for that before they had remained halfe a yeare in
this new Collony they fell into extreame want, not havinge anything left
to sustein them save a little ill conditioned Barley, which ground to
meal & pottage made thereof, one smale ladle full was allowed each
person for a meale, without bread or aught else whatsoever, so that had
not God, by his great providence, moved the Indians, then our utter
enemies, to bringe us reliefe, we had all utterlie by famine perished.
How unable so small a companye of people, soe poorely sent over, were to
make way for such as shoulde followe, may easily be judged.

The first supplie beinge two shippes, the John & Francis & Phenix, with
one hundred & twenty persons, worse every way provided for then the
former, arrived heere about eight or nine months after & found the
Collony consistinge of no more then forty persons (of those) tenn only
able men, the rest at point of death, all utterly destitute of howses,
not one as yet built, so that they lodged in cabbins & holes within the
grounde; victualls they had none, save some small reliefe from the
Indians, as some yet living weare feelinge witnesses, neither were we
for our future and better maintenance permitted to manure or till any
grounde, a thing in a new Plantation principally to be regarded, but
weare by the direction of Sir Thomas Smith, and his officers heere,
wholly imployed in cuttinge downe of masts, cedar, blacke wallnutt,
clapboarde, &c., and in digginge gould oare (as some thought) which
beinge sent for England proved dirt. These works to make retorne of
present proffit hindered others of more necessary consequence of
Plantation.

After this first supplie there were some few poore howses built, &
entrance made in cleeringe of grounde to the quantitye of foure acres
for the wholl Collony, hunger & sickness not permitting any great
matters to bee donne that yeare.

The second supplie was a ship called the Mary Margett, which arrived
here nine months after, about the time of Michaellmas, in her sixty
persons, most gentlemen, few or no tradesmen, except some Polanders to
make Pitch, tarre, potashes, &c., to be retorned for present gaine, soe
meanly likewise were these furnished forth for victualles, that in lesse
then two monthes after their arrivall, want compelled us to imploye our
time abroad in trading with the Indians for corne; whereby though for a
time we partly relieved our necessities, yet in Maye followinge we weare
forced (leavinge a small guarde of gentlemen & some others about the
president at James Towne) to disperse the wholl Collony, some amongst
the Salvadges but most to the Oyster Banks, where they lived uppon
oysters for the space of nine weekes, with the allowance only of a pinte
of Indian corne to each man for a week, & that allowance of corne
continued to them but two weekes of the nine, which kinde of feeding
caused all our skinns to peele off, from head to foote, as if we had
beene flead. By this time arrived Captaine Samuell Argall in a small
Barque, with him neither supplie of men nor victualls from the Company;
but we understandinge that he had some small provisions of bread and
wine, more then would serve his owne companie, required him and the
master of the Barque to remaine ashoare whilst we might bring his sailes
ashoare the better to assure us of his ship & such provisions as coulde
be spared, whereunto he seemed willingly to condescend. Those
provisions, at a small allowance of Biskett, cake, and a small measure
of wine or beere to each person for a Daye some what relieved us for the
space of a month, at the end of which time arrived the thirde supplie,
called Sir Thomas Gates, his fleet, which consisted of seaven shippes &
neere five hundred persons with whom a small proportion of victuall, for
such a number, was landed; howses few or none to entertain them, so that
being quartered in the open feilde they fell uppon that small quantitye
of corne, not beinge above seaven acres, which we with great penury &
sufferance had formerly planted, and in three days, at the most, wholly
devoured it.

These numbers, thus meanly provided, not being able to subsist and live
together weare soone after devided into three parties and dispersed
abroad for their better reliefe. The first under commande of Captaine
Francis West to feat at the head of the River; a second under commande
of Captaine John Smith, then President, at James Towne, & the other,
with Capt. John Martin, in the River at Nansamun, which divisions gave
occasions to the Indiens treacherously to cutt off divers of our men &
boates, and forced the rest at the end of sixe weekes, havinge spent
those small provisions they had with them, to retire to James Town &
that in the depth of winter, when by reason of the colde, it was not
possible for us to endure to wade in the water (as formerly) to gather
oysters to satisfie our hungry stomacks, but constrained to digge in the
grounde for unwholesome rootes whereof we were not able to get so many
as would suffice us, in respect of the frost at that season & our
poverty & weakness, so that famine compelled us wholly to devoure those
Hogges, Dogges & horses that weare then in the Collony, together with
rates, mice, snakes, or what vermin or carryon soever we could light on,
as alsoe Toadstooles, Jewes eares, or what els we founde growing upon
the grounde that would fill either mouth or belly; and weare driven
through unsufferable hunger unnaturallie to eat those thinges which
nature most abhorred, the flesh and excrements of man, as well of our
owne nation as of an Indian, digged by some out of his grave after he
had laien buried three daies & wholly devoured him; others, envyinge the
better state of boddie of any whom hunger had not yet so much wasted as
there owne, lay waight and threatened to kill and eat them; one amonge
the rest slue his wife as she slept in his bosome, cutt her in peeces,
powdered her & fedd uppon her till he had clean devoured all partes
saveinge her heade, & was for soe barbarouse a fact and cruelty justly
executed. Some adventuringe to seeke releife in the woods, dyed as they
fought it, & weare eaten by others who found them dead. Many putt
themselves into the Indians' handes, though our enemies, and were by
them slaine. In this extremitye of famine continued the Collony till the
twenteth of Maye, when unexpected, yet happely, arrived Sir Thomas Gates
& Sir George Somers in two small Barques[FF] which they had built in the
Sommer Islands after the wreake of the Sea adventure wherin they sett
forth from Englande, with them one hundred persons barely provided of
vittel for themselves. They founde the Collony consistinge then of but
sixty persons most famished and at point of death, of whom many soone
after died; the lamentable outcries of theirs soe moved the hartes of
those worthies, not being in any sorte able long to releive their wantes
they soone resolved to imbarque themselves & this poore remainder of the
Collonye, in those two pinnaces & two other small Barques then in the
River, to sett saile for Newfoundland where they might releive their
wants & procure one safer passage for Englande. Every man, glad of this
resolution, laboured his uttmost to further it, so that in three weekes
we had fitted those barques and pinnaces (the best we could) & quitted
James Towne, leaving the poore buildings in it to the spoile of the
Indians, hopeinge never to retorne to re-possess them. When we had not
sailed downe the River above twelve miles but we espied a boat which
afterwards we understoode came from the right Honourable Lorde La Ware,
who was then arived at Point Comfort with three good shipps, wherin he
brought two hundred and fifty persons with some store of Provisions for
them; but by reason he founde the Collony in so great want was forced to
put both his owne people & the rest of the Collony to a very meane
allowance, which was seven pounde of English meale for a man a weeke, &
five pounds for every woman, without the addition of any victuall
whatsoever, except, in the stead of meale, we took valuablie either
pease or oatmeale. Uppon the arrival of that boat, Sir Thomas Gates
understandinge from the Lord La Ware, that his Lordship was arrived with
commission from the Company to be Gov^r & Capt. Gen^l of Virginia, & had
brought men & provisions for the subsistinge & advancing of the
Plantation, he the very next daye, to the great griefe of all his
Company (only except Capt. John Martin), as winde and weather gave
leave, retorned his whole company with charge to take possession againe
of those poore ruinated habitations at James Towne which he had formerly
abandoned; himselffe in a boate proceeded downeward to meete his
Lordship who, making all speede up, arrived shortly after at James
Towne. The time of the yeare being then most unseasonable, by
intemperate heat, at the end of June his people suddenly fallinge
generally into most pestilent diseases of Callentures and feavors, not
lesse then one hundred & fifty of them died within few moneths after, &
that chiefly for want of meanes to comfort them in their weak estates.
The residue alsoe disabled by reason of sicknes could performe nothing
that yeare to the advancement of the Collony, yet with the help of those
people which had arrived with Sir Thomas Gates, together with some of
the ancient Planters, who by use weare growen practique in a hard way of
livinge, two small forts weare erected neare the rivers mouth at
Kicoughtun, encompassed with small younge trees, haveinge for housing in
the one, two formerlie built by the Indians & covered with bark by them,
in the other a tent with some few thatcht cabbins which our people built
at our comming thether. We founde divers other Indian Howses built by
the natives which by reason we could make no use of we burnt, killinge
to the number of twelve or fourteene Indians, & possessinge such corne
as we founde growinge of their plantinge. We remained there untill
harvest, when we reaped (besides what we spent) about the quantitie of
one hundred and fiftie bushells of corne, which, by order from the Lord
La Ware, was transported to James Towne.

[FF] "The Deliverance, of 70 tonn, and the Patience, of 30 tonn." Letter
from the Lord Delaware, Governor of Virginia to the patentees in
England.--Introduction to Strachey's _Virginia Brittania_, p. xxiii.

His Lordship intendinge to send up certain forces to march towardes the
mountaines for the discoverie of gold or silver mines at the end of
October, sent his Patents to Captaine Yardley and Captaine Holcroft,
commanders of those two forts at Kicoughtan, wherin his Lordship gave
order that they should be forthwith abandoned & the people with all
speede to be brought to James Citie, there to prepare for his intended
march.

At that time there arrived a small ship called the daintie, with twelve
men & one woman, some little provision of victuall, two or three horses
& some other slight necessaries for the Collony. Soon after we sett
forward for our intended march, havinge for our leaders Captaine Edwarde
Brewster & Captaine George Yeardley, being in number one hundred
persons, furnished with all such necessary provisions, as the Collony at
that time out of its poverty was able to provide. This designe was
hindered by reason of the unfortunate losse of all our chieffe men
skillfull in findeinge out mines, who weare treacherously slaine by the
Salvadges (inviteinge them ashoare to eat victualls which they wanted)
even when the meate was in theire mouthes, they careinge only to fill
their bellies, foresaw not to prevent this danger which befell them.

This injury we revenged for the present (as we coulde) by killinge some
Indians and burninge many houses, but by reason of this disaster we
proceeded not farther on our journey then the head of the River, where
we spent about three moneths doinge little but induringe much; his
Lordship was there in person for the most part of that time, but his
disease of body groweinge much upon him he resolved to retire to James
Towne, givinge order that the fort which we had built there shoulde bee
quitted and the troupe drawn downe, which accordingly was done. His
Lordship then in regarde of his sickness was advised to putt to Sea in
his ship, the Delaware, to seeke remedie in some other parts for the
health of his bodye. At his going he left Captaine George Percie Deputie
Governor, the people (remaining under his command) provided for three
months at a short allowance of victuals. The calamities of these times
would not any way permit workes of great importance to bee performed,
sith that we did was as much as we coulde doe to live and defende our
selves.

The Plantations helde at his Lordships departure were only James Towne
and Pointe Comforte, where was a small Fort fenced with Pallisadoes, in
it one slight howse, a store and some few thatcht cabbins, which shortly
after by casualtie was burnt with fire; some few great ordinance were
slenderlye mounted at James Towne and Pointe Comfort.

A fortnight after his Lordship's departure arrived a small ship called
the Hercules, with some thirty people and some provisions for them. The
tweife of May followeinge arrived Sir Thomas Dale with three ships and
three hundred persons, his provisions for them of such qualitie (for the
most part) as hogges refused to eat, some whereof were sent backe to
England to testifie the same, and that the rest was not better was
justified upon oath before the Hono^{ble} the Lorde Cheife Justice of
the Common Pleas, at Guilde hall in London, by Sir Thos. Gates & two
other gentlemen.

Sir Thomas Dale, takinge into consideration the precedent times not to
have succeeded accordinge to the greedy desire of Sir Thomas Smith,
presently imployed the general Colony about the lading of those three
ships with such freight as the country then yealded, but a little before
the ships were readie to depart, Sir Thomas Gates arrived with three
ships and three carvills, with him three hundred persons meanly provided
with victualls for such a number. In this fleet, to our remembrance,
arrived sixtie cowes and some swine; it was his care to dispatch those
shipps and carvills fraighted (as aforesaid) to the neglect of workes of
greater importance. Sir Thomas Dale imediately uppon his arrival, to add
to that extremitye of miserye under which the Collonye from her infancie
groaned, made and published most cruell and tiranous lawes, exceeding
the strictest rules of marishall discipline, which lawes were sent over
by Sir Thomas Dale to Sir Thomas Smith by the hande of Mr. William
Starchey,[GG] then Secretarie to the State, and were retorned in print,
with approbation, for our future government, as in divers bookes yet
extant more fully appeareth.

[GG] Mr. Strachey, sailed with Lord Delaware on the 1st of April, 1610,
and arrived at the Capes on the 15th of May. He remained about two
years. He left a well written manuscript account of his observations,
with this title: "The Historie of travaile into Virginia Brittania,
* * * gathered and discovered as well by those who went first hither, as
collected by William Strachey, Gent., the first secretary of the
Colony;" which, edited by R.A. Major, Esq., of the British Museum, was
published by the Hakluyt society in 1849.

At Michaellmas then next followinge, Sir Thomas Dale removed himself
with three hundred persons for the buildinge of Henrico Towne, where
being landed he oppressed his whole companye with such extraordinarye
labors by daye and watchinge by night, as maye seeme incredible to the
eares of any who had not the experimentall triall thereof. Wante of
houses at first landinge in the colde of winter, and pinchinge hunger
continually bitinge, made those imposed labours moft insufferable, and
the best fruits and effects therof to be noe better then the slaughter
of his Majesty's free subjects by starveinge, hangeinge, burneinge,
breakinge upon the wheele and shootinge to deathe, some (more than halfe
famished) runninge to the Indians to gett reliefe beinge againe retorned
were burnt to death. Some for stealinge to satisfie their hunger were
hanged, and one chained to a tree till he starved to death; others
attemptinge to run awaye in a barge and a shallop (all the Boates that
were then in the Collonye) and therin to adventure their lives for their
native countrye, beinge discovered and prevented, were shott to death,
hanged and broken upon the wheele, besides continuall whippings,
extraordinary punishments, workinge as slaves in irons for terme of
yeares (and that for petty offences) weare dayly executed. Many famished
in holes and other poore cabbins in the grounde, not respected because
sicknes had disabled them for labour, nor was their sufficient for them
that were more able to worke, our best allowance beinge but nine ounces
of corrupt and putrified meale and haife a pinte of oatmeale or pease
(of like ill condition) for each person a daye. Those provisions were
sent over by one Winne, a Draper, and Caswell, a baker, by the
appointment (as we conceave) of Sir Thomas Smith. Under this Tiranus
Government the Collony continued in extreame slavery and miserye for the
space of five yeares, in which time many, whose necessities enforced the
breach of those lawes by the strictness and severitye therof, suffered
death and other punishments. Divers gentlemen both there and at Henrico
towne, and throughout the wholl Collonye (beinge great adventurers and
no trendes or alliance to Sir Thomas Smith) weare feeling members of
those generall calamities, as far forth as the meanest fellow sent over.

The buildings and fortifications of that Towne, or thereabouts, were noe
way extraordinary, neither could want, accompanied with bloode and
crueltie, effect better.

Fortification against a foreign enemy there was none, only two or three
peeces of ordenance mounted, and against a domestic noe other but a pale
inclosinge the Towne to the quantitye of foure acres, within which those
buildings that weare erected, coulde not in any man's judgement, neither
did stande above five yeares and that not without continuall
reparations; true it is that there was a Bricke Church intended to be
built, but not soe much as the foundation therof ever finished, but we
contentinge our selves with a church of wood answerable to those houses.
Many other workes of like nature weare by him donne at Henrico and the
precincts therof, but so slightly as before his departure hence, he
himself saw the ruine and desolation of most of them.

Sir Thomas Gates likewise in his time erected some buildinges in and
about James Towne, which by continuall cost in repaireinge of them doe
yet for the most part in some sort remaine.

A framed Bridge was alsoe then erected, which utterly decayed before the
end of Sir Thomas Smith's government, that being the only bridge (any
way soe to be called) that was ever in the country. At this time in all
these labours, the miserye throughout the wholl Collony, in the
scarcitye of foode was equall; which penurious and harde kinde of
liveinge, enforced and emboldened some to petition to Sir Thomas Gates
(then Governor) to grant them that favor that they might employ
themselves in husbandry, that therby they and all others by plantinge of
corne, might be better fed then those supplies of victual which were
sent from Englande woulde afforde to doe, which request of theirs was
denied unlesse they woulde paye the yearlye rent of three barrels of
corne and one monthe's worke to the Collonye, although many of them had
been imployed in the generall workes and services of the Collony from
the beginninge of the Plantation, which harde condition of Tenantship
was then accepted rather then they woulde continue in those generall
services and employments noe waye better then slavery. Most part of the
time that Sir Thomas Gates and Sir Thos. Dale governed we were at warre
with the natives, so that by them divers times were many of our people
slaine, whose blood Sir Thomas Dale neglected not to revenge, by divers
and sundry executions, in killinge many, cuttinge downe and takinge away
their corne, burninge their houses, spoiling their weares, &c.[HH]

[HH] "Their weares in which they take their fish, which are certain
enclosures made with reedes, and framed in the fashion of a laborinth or
maze, sett a fathome deepe in the water, with divers chambers or bedds,
out of which the entangled fish cannot returne or gett out, being once
in."--Strachey, p. 68.

In this time alsoe the two fortes, fort Henry and fort Charles, at
Kicoughton, were againe erected with such buildings as were formerly
expressed, not fortified at all against a forreine enemye, and against
the Indian that common order of a pale or pallisadoe.

The supplies sent out of Englande while Sir Thos. Gates and Sir Thos.
Dale governed were these; a small barque called the John and Francis,
which brought few men and less victual; the next a small ship called the
Sarah, with the like number of men and victuall; the next ship called
the Tresorer, wherin came Capt. Samuell Argoll, bringinge with him to
the number of fiftie good men, which ship and men were wholly imployed
in Trade and other services for relevinge of the Collonye; the next
ship, called the Elizabeth, with about thirteene persons, for them
little provision; the next the same Elizabeth came againe, with some
small store of provisions only; in her Sir Thos. Gates went for
Englande, leavinge the government with Sir Thomas Dale.

A little before the departure of Sir Thomas Gates many of the ancient
planters (by the instigation of Sir Thomas Dale), uppon the promise of
an absolute freedome after three yeares more to be expired (havinge most
of them already served the Collonye six or seaven yeares in that
generall slavery) were yet contented to worke in the buildinge of
Charles Citty and Hundred, with very little allowance of clothinge and
victuall, and that only for the first yeare, being promised one moneth
in the yeare, and one daye in the weeke from Maye daye till harvest, to
gett our maintenance out of the earth without any further helpe; which
promise of Sir Thos. Dale was not performed, for out of that small time
which was allowed for our maintenance we were abridged of nere halfe,
soe that out of our daily taskes we were forced to redeeme time wherin
to labour for our sustenance, therby miserably to purchase our freedome.
Yet so fell it out that our State (by God's mercy) was afterwardes more
happie then others who continued longer in the aforementioned slaverye;
in which time we built such houses as before and in them lived with
continual repairs, and buildinge new where the old failed, untill the
massacre.

For matter of fortification in all this time, were only foure peeces of
ordinance mounted for our defence against the natives. Soone after we
weare seated at Charles Hundred, Sir Thomas Dales resolved of a journey
to Pamonkey River, there to make with the Salvadges either a firme
league of friendship or a present warre; they percieving his intent
inclined rather for peace (more for feare then love) which was then
concluded betwixt them. That donne we retorned to our habitations, where
great want and scarcitye, oppressed us, that continuinge and
increasinge, (our first harvest not yet being ripe) caused in many an
intended mutinye, which beinge, by God's mercy, discovered, the prime
actors were duly examined and convicted, wherof sixe beinge adjudged and
condemned were executed.

After this, arrived for supply a small ship called the John and Francis,
with about twenty persons and little or noe provisions for them. The
next ship, called the Tresorer, arived heere with the number of twenty
persons and as little provisions as the former, in which ship after many
other designes were effected by Sir Thos. Dale, as makinge spoile of the
Keschiacks[II] and Wariscoyacks, impaling some necks of Lande, for
defence against the Salvadges, and in fishing for our reliefe, &c., he
departed from Virginia, and left the Government to Captain George
Yardley, under whom the Collony lived in peace and best plentye that
ever it had till that time, yet most part of the people for that yeare
of his Government continued in the generall services followinge their
labors as Sir Thos. Dale left them by order.

[II] Kiskiack (now Chescake--pronounced Cheesecake) on Smith's map is
located on the south side of the Pamunck (now York) river about the site
of Yorktown.--See Campbell, p. 66.
For Wariscoyack see footnote CC.

At Michaelmas followinge arrived a small ship called the Susan, her
lading (beinge the first Magazin) consistinge of some necessarye
provisions of clothinge, as our wants required, which goods were sould
by Sir Thos. Smith's factor, as we suppose, for a sufficient proffit,
exchanginge with us their commodities for our Tobacco.

At Christmas then followinge, just occasion beinge given by the Indians
of Chiquohomini in many and severall kindes of abuses, and in deridinge
of our demandes, wherunto they had formerly agreed and conditioned with
Sir Thomas Dale to paye us yearlye tribute, viz: a bushell of corne for
every Boweman, for which, by agreement, we were to give to each man one
peece of copper and one iron tomahawke, and to the eight chiefe men each
a suit of redd cloth, which clothes and truckinge stuffe we esteemed of
more worth then their corne. These and the like grosse abuses moved our
Governor, Captaine George Yeardley, to levye a company of men, to the
number of eighty-four, to bee revenged uppon those contemptuous Indians,
which he, accordinge to his desire, fully executed, and returned home
with the spoile of them; concludinge, before his departure from them, a
more firme league in appearance than formerly was, for that it continued
unviolated almost the space of two yeares; our people freely travelinge
from Town to Towne (both men, women and children) without any armes, and
were by the Salvadges lodged in their houses, every way kindly intreated
and noe way molested.

In March followinge, our three yeares' time beinge expired, as it was
our due, we of Charles Hundred demanded our long desired freedome from
that common and generall servitude; unto which request Captaine George
Yeardley, freely and willingly assented, to our great joy and comfort.
Yet remained the most part of the Collony in the former servitude; part
of whom were farmers, the rest imployed in such workes as Sir Thomas
Dale gave order for before his departure.

We that were freed, with our humble thankes to God, fell cheerfully to
our perticular labours, wherby to our great comfort, through his
blessinge, we reaped a plentifull harvest.

In May followinge arived Captain Samuell Argoll with commission to be
Governor. He brought with him to the number of a hundred persons, partly
at the charge of the Company and partly at the charge of private
adventurers; with them was brought a very little provision for that
nomber. At his arrival heere he founde the Collony in all parts well
stored with corne, and at Charles Hundred a granery well furnished by
rentes lately raised and received from the farmers, which corne he tooke
possession of, but how it was imployed himselfe can best give an
account. Whilest he governed, the Collony was slenderly provided of
munition, wherby a strict proclamation was made for restraint of
wastinge or shooting away of powder, under paine of great punishment;
which forbiddinge to shoot at all in our peeces caused the losse of much
of oure corne then growinge uppon the grounde; the Indians perceivinge
our forbearance to shoote (as formerly) concluded thereuppon that our
peeces were, as they saide, sicke and not to be used; uppon this, not
longe after they were boulde to presume to assault some of our people,
whom they slew, therin breakinge that league, which before was so fairly
kept.

Duringe his time of Government most of the people of the Collony
remained (as formerly) in the common service, their freedome not beinge
to be obtained without extraordinary payement.

The next ship that arrived heere was the George, sett forth, as we
supose, at the charge of private adventurers, but came soe meanly
provided with victuall, that had not we, the old Planters, relieved them
most of them had been starved. The next ships, called the Neptune and
Treasurer, arived in August followinge, set out at the charge of the
Right Hono^{ble} the Lord Laware, his noble associates, and some other
private adventurers. The people w^{ch} arived were soe poorely
victualled that had they not been distributed amongst the old Planters
they must for want have perished; with them was brought a most pestilent
disease (called the Bloody flux) which infected all most all the whole
Collonye. That disease, nothstanding all our former afflictions, was
never knowne before amongst us.

The next supply weare two ships called the William & Thomas and the
Guift, which arived in Januarie; the Guift beinge sett forth at the
charge of the Societie of Martin's Hundred, the other by the Magazin and
some private adventurers.

The next, a small ship called the Elinor (sett forth at whose charge we
know not), arived heere in Aprill after, and in her Capt. Samuell
Argoll, leaving his Government, shipt himselfe for Englande. Whatsoever
els befell in the time of his Government we omit to relate, much beinge,
uppon our oathes, alreadie sufficiently examined and our answers sent
for Englande.

By all which hath heertofore beene saide concerninge this Collony, from
the infancie therof and untill the expiration of Sir Thomas Smith's
government, may easily be perceived and plainly understood what just
cause he or any els have to boast of the flourishing estate of those
times, wherin so great miseries and callamities were indured, and soe
few workes of moment or importance performed, himselfe beinge justly to
be charged as a prime author therof, by his neglect of providinge and
alloweinge better meanes to proceede in so great a worke, and in
hindering very many of our frendes from sendinge much releife and meanes
who beinge earnestly solicited from hence by our letters--wherin we
lamentablie complained unto them--have often besought Sir Thomas Smith
that they might have leave to supplie us at their owne charge both with
provision of victuall and all other necessaries, wherin he utterlie
denied them so to doe, protestinge to them that we were in noe want at
all, but that we exceeded in abundance and plentie of all things, so
that therby our frendes were moved both to desist from sendinge and
to doubt the truth of our letters, most part of which weare by him
usually intercepted and kept backe; farther giveinge order by his
directions to the Governor heere, that all men's letters should be
searched at the goinge away of ships, and if in anye of them weare
founde that the true estate of the Collony was declared, they were
presented to the Governor and the indighters of them severely punished;
by which meanes noe man durst make any true relation to his frendes of
his owne or the Collonye's true estate; neither was it permitted to anye
to have passe to goe home, but by force were kept heere and employed as
we have saide (save some few), one of whom receved his passe from the
Kinge, and that closely made up in a garter, least it should have been
seized uppon and he kept heere notwithstandinge. Those whom their
frendes procured their passe in open courte from the Companye were, by
private direction, neverthelesse made staye of, others procuringe
private letters having been lett goe.

We must alsoe noat heere, that Sir Thos. Dale, at his arivall finding
himself deluded by the aforesaid protestations, pulled Capt. Newport by
the beard, and threatninge to hange him, for that he affirmed Sir Thos.
Smith's relation to be true, demandinge of him whether it weare meant
that the people heere in Virginia shoulde feed uppon trees.

Soe may we heere conclude, as some have concluded for him, to what great
growth of perfection (with the expence of that seaventie thousand
poundes) the Plantation was advanced in the time of his 12 years'
government, but whether, as it is saide, he be to be praised for the
managaing of these affaires, with much unanimity, moderation, integritie
and judgment, we leave it to censure.

At the end of this twelve yeares arived Sir George Yeardley to be Gov^r
and founde the Collony in this estate and thus furnished, vizt: For
fortification against a forreign ennemie there was none at all; two demy
culverin only were mounted uppon rotten carriages and placed within
James Citty, fitter to shoot downe our houses then to offend an ennemie.
At Charles Hundred, which were mounted by Sir Thos. Dale, two demy
culverin and one sacre; fortifications against a domestique enimie very
mean. For Forts, Towns and Plantations he founde these: James Citty,
Henrico, Charles Citty and Hundred, Shirley Hundred, Arrahattock, Martin
Brandon and Kicoughton, all w^{ch} were but poorely housed and as ill
fortified; for in James Cittie were only those houses that Sir Thom.
Gates built in the time of his government, with one wherin the Gov^r
allwayes dwelt, an addition beinge made therto in the time of Captaine
Sam^l Argoll, and a church, built, wholly at the charge of the
inhabitants of that cittie, of Timber, beinge fifty foote in length and
twenty foot in breadth; at Paspahayes alsoe weare some few slight houses
built; at Henrico, two or three old howses, a poore ruinated church with
some few poore buildings in the Island; Coxen Dale and the Maine and att
Arrahatocke one house, at Charles Cittie sixe howses much decayed, and,
that we may not be too tedious, as these, soe were the rest of the
places furnisht.

For people then alive about the nomber of foure hundred, very many of
them in want of corne, utterlie destitute of cattle, twine, Poultrie and
other Provisions to nourish them.

For Barques, Pinnaces, Shallops, Barges and Boates he founde only one
olde Frigott, which belonged to the Sommer Islandes, one olde Shallopp
built in Sir Thos. Dale's time, one boat built in Sir Sam'l Argoll's
time, with two small boates belonginge to private men. For munition a
very small quantitye, the most part thereof beinge very bad and of
little use. For ministers to instruct the people he founde only three
authorized, two others who never received their orders.

For staple commodities at his arrivall he founde none afoot save only
Tobacco. The natives he founde uppon doubtfull termes, neither did we
ever perceive that at any time they voluntarilie yealded themselves
subjects or servants to our Gracious Soveraigne, neither that ever they
tooke any pride in that title, nor paide they at any time any yearly
contribution of corne for the sustentation of the Collony, nor could we
at any time keepe them in such goode respect or correspondencie that
they and we did become mutuallie helpfull or proffitable, each to other,
but to the contrary, whatsoever at any time was done uppon them
proceeded from fear without love, for such help as we have had from them
have been procured by sworde or trade. And heere can we noe way approve
of that which hath lately beene saide in the behalfe of Sir Thos. Smith,
by some of his new frendes, that a flourishinge plantation in Virginia,
erected in the time of his 12 yeares government, hath since been
distroyed through the ignorance of succeedinge Governors heere, for that
by what we have already saide all the worlde may judge in what a
flourishinge estate it was, and to what growth of perfection it was
advanced, at the arivall of Sir Geo. Yeardley to be Gov^r here, it
beinge then in our judgements, that were members of the colony, in a
poore estate.

The whole 12 yeares expired.

_Aprill, 1619._--Arived Sir Geo. Yeardeley, bringing certain commissions
and instructions from the Company for the better establishinge of a
Commonwealth heere, wherin order was taken for the removing of all those
grievances which formerly were suffred and manifested the same by
publishinge a Proclamation that all those that were residend heere
before the departure of Sir Thos. Dale should be freed and acquitted
from such publique services and labours which formerly they suffered,
and that those cruell lawes by which we had soe longe been governed were
now abrogated, and that we were now to be governed by those free lawes
which his Ma^{ty's} subjects live under in Englande. And farther that
free libertie was given to all men to make choice of their dividents of
lande and, as their abilities and meanes w^d permitt, to possesse and
plant uppon them. And that they might have a hande in the governinge of
themselves, it was granted that a general assemblie should be helde
yearly once, wherat were to be present the Gov^r and Counsell with two
Burgesses from each Plantation freely to be elected by the inhabitants
thereof; this assembly to have power to make and ordaine whatsoever
lawes and orders should by them be thought good and proffittable for our
subsistance. The effect of which proceedinge gave such incouragement to
every person heere that all of them followed their perticular labours
with singular alacrity and industry, soe that, through the blessinge of
God uppon our willinge labors, within the space of three yeares, our
countrye flourished with many new erected Plantations, from the head of
the River to Kicoughtan, beautifull and pleasant to the spectators, and
comfortable for the releife and succor of all such as by occasion did
travaile by land or by water; every man giveinge free entertainment,
both to frendes or others. The plenty of these times likewise was such
that all men generally were sufficiently furnished with corne, and many
alsoe had plenty of cattle, swine, poultry and other good provisions to
nourish them. Monethly courtes were held in every precinct to doe
justice in redressinge of all small and petty matters, others of more
consequence beinge referred to the Gov^r, Counsell and Generall
Assemblie. Now alsoe were begunne and sett a foote the erectinge of Iron
Workes, plantinge of vines and mulberrie trees for the nourishinge of
silke wormes; a trial made for silke grasse tillage for English graine,
gardeninge, and the like, which gave great hopes of present and future
plenty in their severall perticulars, wherin no doubt but much more had
been effected had not great sicknes and mortalitie prevented.

Those yeares fallinge out to be generally contagious through this
continent, the people alsoe sent over arrived heere at the most
unseasonable time of the yeare, beinge at the heat of Sommer, and divers
of the ships brought with them most pestilent infections, wherof many of
their people had died at Sea, soe that these times alsoe of plenty and
libertie were mixed with the calamities of sicknes and mortalitie.

       *       *       *       *       *

_In October, 1621_, Arived Sir Fras. Wyatt, Knight, with commission to
be Gov^r and Capt. Gen^l of Virginia. He ratified and confirmed all the
afore mentioned liberties, freedomes and priveledges, to our great
happines and content; the country alsoe flourished and increased in her
former proceedinges, as iron workes, plantinge of vines and mulberrie
for silke, &c. A ship alsoe was sent to the Summer Islandes for such
commodities as that place afforded, as Potatoes, Fig Trees, Orange and
Lemon Trees, and such like, many of which prosper and growe very likely
to increase. But amidst this happines was the Hande of God sett against
us, in great part, no doubt, for the punishment of our ingratitude in
not being thankefull but forgettfull that by his mercye we were
delivered from such bondage and calamitie as before time we had
suffered. Justly likewise were we punished for our greedy desires of
present gaine and proffit, wherin many showed themselves insatiable and
covetous; we beinge too secure in trustinge of a treacherous enimie, the
Salvadges, they, whilest we entertained them frendley in our houses,
tooke their opportunities and suddenly fell uppon us, killing and
murdering very many of our people, burninge and devastinge their houses
and plantations, this happeninge uppon the _two and twenteth of March_
followinge (1622), stroocke so at the life of our wellfare by blood and
spoile, that it almost generally defaced the beautie of the wholl
Collonye, puttinge us out of the way of bringinge to perfection those
excellent workes wherin we had made soe faire a beginninge.

This deadly stroake being given to the great amazement and ruine of our
State, caused our Governor and Counsell, withall speede, for the safetie
of the rest (lest the Indians shoulde take courage to pursue what they
had begunne), to re-collect the straglinge and woefull Inhabitants, soe
dismembered, into stronger bodies and more secure places. This enforced
reducement of the Collony into fewer bodies, together with the troble of
warre then in hande, caused the year following a slender harvest to be
reaped, wherby we weare constrained to relye upon hopes for our reliefe
by shippinge out of Englande, and by trading with the more remote
Salvadges, most part of which supplies from Englande unfortunately
miscarried by the waye, the Salvadges, likewise, from whome we hoped to
have helpes by trade, proved our most treacherous ennemies, cunninglye
circumventinge and cruellie murderinge such as were employed abroade to
gett reliefe from them, by all which misaccidents we fell that yeare
into great want and scarcitye; which since, by the blessinge of God,
through our supplies we have had from the Company, together with a
plentifull harvest, hath bene abundantly restored. Our Gov^r, Counsell
and others have used their uttermost and Christian endeavours in
prosequtinge revenge against the bloody Salvadges, and have endeavoured
to restore the Collonye to her former prosperitye, wherin they have used
great diligence and industrye, imployinge many forces abroade for the
rootinge them out of severall places that therby we may come to live in
better securitie, doubtinge not but in time we shall clean drive them
from these partes, and therby have the free libertie and range for our
cattle, the increase of whom may bringe us to plentie, and maye alsoe
more freely goe on againe with setting up those staple commodities which
we hoped by this time to have brought to good perfection.

For the supplies of shippinge, men, cattle and provisions that have
arived heere since Sir Thomas Smith left his government we can not nowe
well reckon up, they beinge manye, but must referre you to the printed
bookes and to the Lists and Invoices retorned by Sir Geo. Yeardley.

For the State of the Collony at this present we leave to the report of
such commissioners as are nowe sent over by the Right Hon. the Lordes of
his Ma^{tie's} privie counsell.

This being reade in the Gen^l Assemblie received full approbation.

[Endorsed.]

Virginia--A relation of its Planting.

[This document is undated but is placed in the Callendar among papers of
1625?]




A LIST

OF THE NUMBER OF

MEN, WOMEN AND CHILDREN

INHABITING IN THE SEVERAL COUNTIES

WITHIN THE COLONY OF VIRGINIA,

_ANNO D^{NE}, 1634_.



PREFACE.


The three succeeding papers are printed from the De Jarnette collection.
The first is a census in gross without any details of sex, age or social
condition. In these respects it lacks the interest which one feels in
the list made out in 1623.

In February, 1623, there were living in the Colony 1277 persons, and
including 371 who had died during the preceding year, _i.e._ since
April, 1622; it is evident that the greatest number of inhabitants
during the year ending February 16, 1623--not including those murdered
in the massacre--amounted to 1648; and in 1634, eleven years afterwards,
they amounted to 5,119, being an increase of 3,471, or an average of
about 315 per annum, by birth and immigration. Accustomed as we are to
the rapid growth of new countries this seems but a small increase, but
when it is remembered that they made the voyage in sailing vessels only,
and that it then not unfrequently lasted three or four months, we have
little cause for wonder.

The next paper is a copy of a letter from His Majesty Charles II., to
the Governor, Sir Wm. Berkeley, returning his thanks for a present of
silk grown in Virginia. The first settlers were very anxious for success
in this department of industry, and the House of Burgesses in 1657-'8
passed a law offering a premium of 5,000 pounds of tobacco to any one
who made "100 pounds of wound silke in any one year," and in the next
session, 1658-'9, the premium was made 10,000 pounds of tobacco for 50
pounds of "wound silke." We have frequently heard repeated a tradition
to the effect that Charles II. wore a robe made of Virginia silk at his
coronation. The circumstance of which this document is evidence, is
probably the nearest approach to any thing of the sort that ever
occurred, and hereafter this with the foolish and groundless story of
one of the Lees going to see him when an exile at Breda, to offer him a
crown and a refuge in Virginia, must be consigned to that oblivion which
is likely, soon, we hope, to receive many of the mythical legends which
have heretofore passed current for the history of Virginia.

The third is a list of the parishes and their ministers in 1680, the
number of the latter showing that the people were poorly provided for in
this respect, and that some of the parishes had no ministers. This
deficiency was, however, in a measure provided for by the appointment of
"readers" under the operation of acts passed February 1632-'3, by which
if a minister's curÃ© "is so large that he cannot be present on the
Saboth and other holy days. _It is thought fit_ That they appoint
deacons for the readinge of common prayer in their absence;" and
further, in March, 1661-'2, it was enacted "That every parish not
haveing a minister to officiate every Sunday doe make choice of a grave
and sober person to read divine service at the Parish church."--Hen.
Vol. I., p. 208; Vol. II., p. 46, 54.




STATE PAPERS,            }
COLONIAL.                }
 _Vol. 8, No. 55 (1634)._}


A LIST _of the number of men, women and children Inhabitinge in the
severall Counties w^{th}in the Collony of Virginia. Anno D^{ne}, 1634._


_Imprimis_, from Arrowhattock to Shirley hundred Iland, on both
sides the river, being within the Countie of Henrico,                419

Item, from Shirley hundred Iland to Weysnoake, on both sides the
River, being w^{th}in the countie of Charles Citty,                  511

Item, from Upper Cheppeake Creeke to Lawnes Creeke on the
Southward side, and from Checohominey River to Creeke on the
northward side of the River, being w^{th}in the Countie of James
Citty,                                                               886

Item, from Ketche's Creeke & Mulbury Iland to Maries Mount, on
the northward side of the river, being w^{th}in the countie of
Warricke river,                                                      811

Item, from Lawne's Creeke to Warrosquyoake Creeke on the
southward side of the river, beinge within the Countye of
Warrosquyoake,                                                       522

Item, from Maires Mount to Fox hill, w^{th} the Plantations of
the Back river & the old Pocolson river on the Northward side,
and from Elizabeth river to Chesepeake River on the southward
side of the river, being w^{th}in the Countie of Elizabeth Citty,    859

Item, in the Plantations of Kiskyake, Yorke & the new Pocolson,
being within the Countie of Charles River,                           510

Item, in the Plantations on the Esterlie side of Chessepeake Bay,
being w^{th}in the Countie of Accowmack,                             396

                            The whole number is,                   4,914

After this list was brought in there arrived a ship of Holand with 145
from the Bermudas.

And since that 60 more in an English shipp w^{ch} likewise came from the
Bermudas.

I certify that the foregoing is a true and
authentic copy taken from the volume
above named.

JOHN McDONAGH,

Record Agent,

July 14th, 1871.




A LETTER

FROM

His Majesty, Charles the Second,

TO SIR WM. BERKELEY, GOV. OF VA.

ACKNOWLEDGING THE RECEIPT OF A PRESENT OF
SILK MADE IN THE COLONY, AND PROMISING
HIS PROTECTION TO THIS BRANCH
OF INDUSTRY.

1648.




STATE PAPERS,                        }
COLONIAL--VIRGINIA.                  }
_Vol. 59, No. 115 (Nov'r --, 1668)._ }


[Partly damaged by damp.]

Trusty & welbeloved, Wee Greet you well. Wee have received w^{th} much
content y^e dutifull respects of that Our Colony in y^e present lately
made us by you & y^e Councell there of y^e first product of y^e new
Manufacture of Silke, w^{ch}, as a mark of Our Princely acceptation of
yo^r dutyes & of y^r particular encouragement, Wee resolve to give to
yo^r industry in y^e prosecution and improvem^t of that or any other
usefull Manufacture, Wee have comanded to be wrought up for y^e use of
Our owne person, and herein Wee have thought good to * * * * * ledge
from Our owne Royall * * * * * you of Our more especiall care &
protection in all occasions that may concern that our ancient Colony and
Plantation, whose laudable industry, raysed in good part & improved by
y^e sobriety of y^e governm^t, we esteeme much, & are desirous by this &
any other seasonable expression of Our favor, as farre as in us lies, to
encourage. And soe Wee bid you Farewell. Given at Our Court at
Whitehall, the--day of November, in y^e 20^{th} yeare of our Reigne,
1668.

By his Ma^{tie's} Comand.
His Ma^{ty} to S^r W^m. Berkeley & Colony.

[Endorsed.]

To our Trusty and Welbeloved Sir William Berkeley, Kn^t, Our Governour
of our Colony of Virginia, to be communicated to y^e Councill of that
Our Colony.

     I certify that the foregoing is a true and authentic copy taken
     from the volume above named.

JOHN McDONAGH,
Record Agent,
July 1st, 1871.




A LIST

OF

THE PARISHES IN VIRGINIA

IN 1680.



STATE PAPERS,                          }
COLONIAL--VIRGINIA.                    }
_Vol. 60, No. 410 (June 30th, 1680)._  }


A LIST OF THE PARISHES IN VIRGINIA.

JUNE THE 30TH, 1680.


Henrico County        {Varina,                } John Ball.
                      {1/2 Bristol,[JJ]       }

Charles Citty Co^ty   {1/2 Bristol,           }
                      {Jordan,                } Readers onely.
                      {Westover,              }
                      {                       }
                      {Weyonoak,              } M^r Paul Williams.
                      {Martin Brandon,        }

Surry County          {Southwork,             } M^r John Clough.
                      {Lawns Creek,           } M^r John Woyre.

James Citty County    {Martins hundred,       }
                      {1/2 Brewton,           }
                      {Wallingford,           }
                      {Wilmington,            } M^r Thomas Hampton.

Isle of Wight         {Isle of Wight Parish,  } M^r Rob^t Park.
                      {Lower Parish,          } M^r W^m Housden.

                      {Upper Parish,          } M^r John Gregory.
Nanzemund             {Lower Parish,          } M^r John Wood.
                      {Chicokatuck Parish,    } M^r W^m Housden, who
                                                 serves in Isle of Wight
                                                 alsoe.
Warwick County        {Denby,                 } M^r John Larwence for
                      {Mulberry Island,       }   both.

Eliz. Citty County    {Inone Parish.          } M^r John Page.


Lower Norfolk         {Eliz. River Parish,    } M^r W^m Nern.
                      {Lynhaven Parish,       } M^r James Porter.

                       { 1/2 Brewton,         }
                       { Hampton Parish,      } M^r Rowland Jones.
Yorke County           { York Parish,         } M^r Edwd. Foliott.
                       { New Towson Parish,   } M^r John Wright.

              { South  { St. Peter's Parish,  } M^r Wm. Sellick.
              { side.  { Blissland Parish,    } M^r Tho. Taylor.
New Kent      {                               }
              { North  { St. Steven's Parish, } M^r Wm. Williams.
              { side,  { Stratton Maj^r       } M^r Robt. Carr.

                       { Kingston,            } M^r Michaell Zyperius.
                       { Ware Parish,         } M^r ---- Clark.
Glost^r County         { Telsoe Parish,       } M^r Thomas Vicars.
                       { Abingdon,            } M^r John Gwynn.

Midd^x County            Christ Church Parish,  M^r John Sheppard.

                       { Farnam,              } M^r Charles Davies.
Rapp^a County          { Sydenburn,           } M^r ---- Dudley.

                       { Stafford Parish,     }
Stafford County        { Choatanck,           } John Wough.

                       { Copeland Parish,     } M^r ---- Scrimmington.
Westmerland County     { Washington,          } M^r William Butler.

                       { Fairfield,           } M^r John Farnefold.
Northumberl^d. Cou'ty  { Wacacommico,         } M^r Davies, who serves
                                                   alsoe at Farnam.

Accomack County          Accomack Parish,       M^r Henry Parkes.

                       { Northampton Parish,  }
Northampton County     { Hungers Parish,      } M^r Thomas Teagle.

                       { Christ's Church,     }
Lancaster County       { White Chapple,       } M^r Benj. Doggett.

     I certify that the foregoing is a true and authentic copy taken
     from the volume above named.

JOHN McDONAGH,
Record Agent,
July 14th, 1871.

[JJ] The 1/2 occurs in such cases as when one portion of the parish is
in one county and the other portion in another. Thus Bristol parish was
partly in Henrico and partly in Charles City counties.




ADDENDA.


The following additions to the text and notes are suggested as
explanatory, without being considered superfluous.

Page 16.--"The sixte petition, to change the sauage name of Kicowtan,"
was granted. In 1621, Treasurer Sandys in his report to the Company
informed them that the name had been changed to Elizabeth
Cittie.--Neill's history, page 178.

Page 25.--The word "howes" inserted in connection with various kinds of
dogs, is our modern word hoe; Smith has it hows on page 86, and howes on
page 162.

Page 29.--Capt. Henry Spelman, was the third son of the distinguished
antiquary, Sir Henry Spelman, of Conghan, Norfolk, England. He was about
twenty-one years of age when he came to Virginia, in 1609, for which he
accounts as follows: "Beinge in displeasuer of my frendes, and desirous
to see other countryes. After three months' sayle we cum with prosperus
winds in sight of Virginia." Afterwards he says, "I was carried by Capt.
Smith, our President, to ye Fales, to ye litell Powhatan, wher, vnknowne
to me he sould me to him for a towne called Powhatan."--Spilman's
Relation, pp. 15, 16. Dr. Simons, in Smith's General Historie, says:
"Captain West and Captain Sickelmore sought abroad to trade; Sickelmore,
upon the confidence of Powhatan, with about thirty other as careless as
himselfe, were all slaine, onely Jeffrey Shortridge escaped, and
Pokahontas, the King's daughter, saued a boy called Henry Spilman, that
liued many yeeres after, by her meanes, among the Patawmokes;" this
occurred in 1609.--Smith, p. 105. He remained with the Indians but
little more than one year, for in 1610 Capt. Argall being sent to the
"riuer Patawmoke to trade for corne," where finding him, used Spelman's
influence to secure the loading of his vessel with corn, and Spelman
returned with him to Jamestown.--Smith, p. 108. Spelman adds, "and
brought into England," p. 221. We then lose sight of him until he is
arraigned before the Assembly at Jamestown in 1619 (_ante_ p. 29) He
makes his final appearance in 1623, when we are told, he was sent with a
bark and twenty-six men to "trucke in the River Patawmek," where at some
place, the name of which was to his companions unknown, he landed with
twenty-one of his companions, when the savages made hostile
demonstrations "and presently after they" (the five left in the bark)
"heard a great brute amongst the Saluages ashore, and saw a man's head
thrown downe the banke, whereupon they weighed Anchor and returned home,
but how he was surprised or slaine is vncertaine."--Smith p. 161.
Spelman wrote a short account of his observations while among the
Indians, and it laid in obscurity until the sale of Dawson Turner's
library, in 1859, when it was bought by Mr. Joseph Lilly and, by
accident, again lost; and at the sale of Mr. Lilly's library, in 1871,
it was again discovered and purchased for James F. Hunniwell, Esq., who
has had one hundred copies printed for private circulation.

Spelman was not the only Englishman with the savages. In the same year
that Spelman was sold for a town, or saved by Pocahontas--whichever
version being correct--Admiral Newport gave Powhatan a boy, named Thomas
Salvage, in exchange for "Namontack, his trustie seruant." Spelman says
Savage was murdered by the Indians, but there is a tradition that he
lived nearly all his life with them; became possessor of a tract of land
on the eastern shore by gift and that it remained in his family until
within the last ten years, when it was sold by some of his descendants
then living in Philadelphia. The authority for this statement is
obtained in correspondence with Hon. Hugh B. Grigsby, LL. D., President
of the Virginia Historical Society.

Page 39.--To note to Jordan's Journey it may be added that a reference
to this place is doubtless made when Smith says: "After the massacre
many of the inhabitants fortified themselves against other attacks, and
Master Samuel Iorden gathered but a few about him at Begger's Bush" (the
title of one of Fletcher's comedies) "where he fortified."--Smith, p.
150; Campbell, p. 164.

Page 47.--The following may be added to the note on Glass House: "For
glass they," the Indians, "knowe not, though the country wants not
sal-sodiack enough to make glasse, and of which we have made some store
in a goodly house sett up for the same purpose, a little without the
island where Jamestown stands."--Strachey's Virginia Brittania (1612),
p. 71. "To take care of Capt. Wm. Norton and certaine Italians sent to
sitt a glass house."--Instructions to Sir Francis Wyatt (1621), Hening
I., p. 116.

Page 47.--To note on Warwick-Squrake add: "In the autumn of 1607, Capt.
Smith, with "six or seaven in company," went to Kicoughtan to get food
from the Indians by trade. On his return he discovered the town and
county of Warraskoyack."--Smith, page 45.

RICHMOND, VA., _July 15, 1874_.

